CHAUKHAMBHA

ORIENTAL

STUDIES

4

OF
PRA^ASTAPÄDA
With the Nyäyakandall

of

Srldhara

Translated into English
By
Mahämahopädhyäya
GANGÄNÄTHA JHÄ

C H A U K H A M B H A

O R I E N T A L I A

Publisher i
CHAUKHAMBHA ORIENTALIA
P. 0. Chaukhambha, Post Box No. 32
Gokul Bhawan, K. 37/109, Gopal Mandir Lane
VARANASI-221001 (India )
Telephone : 63354
Telegram : Gokulotsav
Branch—Bungalow Road, 9 U. B. Jawahar Nagar
DELHI-110007
Phone : 221617

(£j Chaukhambha Orientalia
Reprint 1982
Price Rs. 150-00

Also can be had from
1. CHAUKHAMBHA SANSKRIT
PostJBox[No. 139
K. 37/116,tJadau Bhawan
Gopal^Mandir Lane
VARANASI-221001 (India )
Phone :.65889
2. CHAUKHAMBHA VISVABHARATI
Chowk ( Opposite Chitra Cinema )
VARANASI-221001
Phone : 65444
3. CHAUKHAMBHA BHARATI ACADEMY
K. 37/109, Gokul Bhawan
Gopal Mandir Lane
VARANASI-221001 (India)
Phone: 63354

INTRODUCTION
According to the custom current among modern
writers, it should be my duty here to deal with the date
of the work here translated. But the most unfortunate
thing is, as I have often said, that I have no faith in
the methods of reasoning employed in fixing the dates
of old writers. I shall therefore make no attempt at
this uncongenial task. I might have supplied my readers with what other people have said on this subject.
But this has been already done—and done in a manner
very much better than I could ever do—by the learned
translator of the Vaisesika-Sütras in the 'Sacred Books
of the Hindus' series.
I shall therefore content myself with brief notes on
some of the ideas that have struck me in course of my
work on Prasastapäda's Bhäsya.
The first poiat to notice in this connection is the
exact.nature of the work. It is known, and has been
known, as the 'Bhäsya? on Kanada 5 s Sutras. But the
name 'Bhäsya3 has been explained as :—

'The Bhäsya is that which explains the meaning of
the Sutra by means of words in accordance with the
Sutra, and which also offers explanation of its own
statements.5

Judged by the definition, Prasastapäda 3 s work is not
entitled to the title of ; Bhasya\ It does not explain the
Sütras at all; in fact it does not deal with the several
subjects in the order of the Sutras. It has the form of
an independent manual; it re-arranges the whole system, and adopts its own arrangement of topics. And
yet we find that it has always been regarded as *Bhasya\
We find Vardhamäna Upädhyäya—who lived at least
500 years ago—in his Nyäyanibandha prakäsa, propounding the following definition of cBhäsya\

The Bhäsya, according to this, is that which gathers
the topics dealt with in the Sütras and explains them,
without taking into account the order of the Sütras.—
Or it may be defined as an explanation of the Sütras
not depending upon any other explanation; and thus
differing from the 'Vftti' which is an explanation dependent upon another explanation.
Vardhamäna cites the name of Prasastakara, who is
the same as our author Prasastapäda. And it is clear
that Vardhamäna has propounded those definitions
simply with a view to bring Prasastapäda 3 s work under
the category. However that be, this quotation shows
that at least 500 years ago, our author's work was
known as 'Bhäsya'.
One other point that has struck me in this work is
the bold and confident manner in which the Bhäsyakära has propounded his explanation of the processes

f Creation and Dissolution. Writers as a rule are either
silent on these topics, or deal with them in a halting
half-hearted manner.
We cannot do better than refer the reader to Sec.
40 of the translation for a graphic account of the processes of Dissolution and Creation.
Hindus have been taxed with postulating five 'elements'. It seems that the charge is not well founded.
People who make this charge apparently use the term
'element' in the chemical sense of a substance that cannot be further analysed. Are the 'Earth, Water, Fire,
Air and Äkäsa? of the Vaisesika such unanalysable substances ? On referring to any Vaisesika manual it will
be clear that what is ordinarily known as 'Earth' is not
regarded by th$ Vaisesika to be an 'element' in the
technical sense; if it were so regarded then alone could
the Vaisesika view be stigmatised as primitive and unscientific ? The touch of 'Earth 3 in its pure state is
said to be 'neither hot nor cold,5 so also the touch of
'Air,'—and when asked why the ordinary Earth and
ordinary Air are found to be very far from 'neither hot
nor cold', the Vaisesika explains that this is due to the
Earth and Air being mixed up with particles of fire or
water, which make them feel hot or cold. From this it
is clear that what is regarded as 'element' is not the
Earth &c, as we know and see them; but as they exist
in their pristine and pure state, unmixed with any
other substances; that is to say, in their atomic condition. Is it, then very unscientific to regard the atoms
of Earth, Fire &c, to be 'elements' ? What is the 'atom
of Earth' but an ultimate material substratum of
odour ? Can this be analysed further ? Further the
name that the Hindu gives to these substances is only

'bhüta; and it is not fair to translate "bhütä* as 'element*
and then tax him with being unscientific. What the
Vaisesika means by saying that these are the 'five
bhMas? is that there are five states of matter—solid
( Earth ), liquid (Water ), gaseous (Air), luminious (Fire)
and Etheric ( ? ) ( Äkäsa ) . Is this division absolutely
unscientific.
Having thus briefly indicated a few of the points
that occurred to me in course of my study, I now record
my gratitude towards my venerable Guru, Mahäniahopädhyäya Pandita Shivakumära Misra of Benares without whose help readily accorded, the Bhäsya, and still
more the Nyayakandall would have remained unintelligible; and then to my friend Babu Govinda Dasa of
Benares and to Pandita Vindhyeshvari Parsäd Divivedin, who have done much, and are doing still more,
• towards bringing to light the long lost treasures of Indian
philosophical literature; and last, but by no means least,
to my late honoured colleague—Dr. G. Thibaut, at
whose instance this translation was undertaken, and
who, if alive, would have rejoiced at its completion.
One word of apology is due to the reader. The time
that the printing has taken—more than 10 years—and
the vicissitudes through which my health has passed
during all these years-—have made it impossible for any
careful revision of the wori, either in manuscript or in
course of proof-reading; and I am afraid the work
abounds in many a crude and vague expression and
endless inaccuracies, which could have been avoided
with a little more care.
Muir College, Allahabad )
December 24th, 1915 (

^
,
„
Ganganathajka

CONTENT
PAGE
VIII
Dedicatory Sloka
Introduction
ni-vi
Chapter I—Introduction
1
Section ( 1 ) Benediction ...
1
Section ( 2 ) Purpose of the Science
... 13
Section ( 3 ) Source of Knowledge
... 16
... 17
fhantcr IT
Section ( 1 ) Enumeration and classification of
Categories
...
...
... 17
Chapter III—Similarities^and Dissimilarities among
Categories x ...
..;
... 37
Chapter'IV—Of Special Substances—Introductory V ... 64
Section ( 1 ) The Earth
...
...
...
65
Section ( 2 ) On Water
...
...
... 81
Section ( 3 ) On Fire
...
...
... 88
Section ( 4 ) On Air
...
...
... 100
Chapter V
Section ( 5 ) Mahabhutas, Process of Creation
"• 108
Section ( 6) Aküsa
...
...
... 128
Section ( 7 ) On Time
...
...
... 140
Section ( 8 ) On Space
...
...
... 147
Section ( 9 ) Atma
...
...
... 152
Section (10 ) Mind
...
...
... 198
Chapter VI—On Qualities, Similarities and Dissimilarities
...
...
... 209
Chapter VI—Section ( I I ) On Actions
...
... 616
Chapter VII—On Sämanya—Community ...
... 651
Chapter VIII—On Visesa—Individuality ...
... 671
Chaptar IX—OnSamavaya—Inherence
...
... 675
Errata ...
...
...
...
... I-II

DEDICATORY ÖLOKA

AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION
:
OF THE
FADÄR

THA- DHA RMA-SA NGRA

HA

Pragastapäda's Bhäshya on the Vaigeshika SCitnas
of Kanada along with the NäyayakandaiT
[ Qridharas Commentary on the Bkäshya. ]
CHAPTER 1.
Introductory.
SECTION ( 1 )—BENEDICTION.
2'ext:—Having bowed to Igvara, the Cause, and then to
the sage Kmyida, I am going to describe the
nature of things (or, compose the work called
' Padärthaäharmasangraha.') hading to the best
of results.
Commentary.
I take my refuge; in God, the beginningless, endless,
effulgent, cause of the world, whose will ever comes true, and
whose body consists of eternal consciousness.
Salutation to the blessed Purushottama, whose essence is
pure knowledge, and who has shaken off all bondage,—to Him,
stainless and without a second, whom only those see who have
their minds centred in deep meditation and whose wanderings
(iu the cycle of metempyphosis) have come to an end !
At the commencement of the work, the Author offers
a salutation to his Deity; as also to the original founder of the
system of philosophy, by moans of the first half of the gloka—
*Pranamya &c.' It is a usage common among people that
before beginning any action due obeisance is offered to the
Deity and to oneVT-eacbers. The effect of such obeisance lies

2

PEAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. I. SECTION (1).

in the removal of obstacles in the way of the due accomplishment
of the desired work. It could not be absolutely fruitless; as in that
case, no intelligent person could ever have recourse to it. Nor
could it have any other result save the due accomplishment
of the contemplated work; as iu that case it would not necessarily be used at the commencement of that work. Then too,
in as much as what is uppermost in the person's mind at the
time that he takes up a work is the due accomplishment of that
work there is no other result approximate enough to be
accepted as following from the salutation in question..
Objection:—u Does the removal of obstacles result from
"salutation only, or from something else also ? There is no
"such necessary rule as that it follows from salutation only;
"because, t?ven in the absence of such salutation, we find two
"such Bkashyas, as that ort the N'ydya and the Mvmäasd ezhtras
"in their complete forms. Then* again, if it resulted from other
"things also, then there would be. no reasonable ground for a
"necessary recourse to this particular course only."
To the above we make the following reply :—The cessation
of obstacles results from salutation oniy; as we find all good men
having recourse to it, at the commencement of all actions. Nor
is it a fact that the authors of the Nyäya and the 3Jlm.änsä
Bhä8hyas did not offer any salutation; because they too must
have done it.
Question :—" How do you know that ?"
Answer:—We infer it from the fact of the authors
being good aod wise persons. Let the case of the wise rest;
even among the Mlcechas we find that they do not engage
themselves in any action unless they have saluted their own
divinities. Under the circumstances, it cannot be for a
moment believed, that two such extremely good and godly
persons, as Pakshila Svämi (the author of the Nyäyabhäshya)
and Qavara Svämi (the author of the Mlmänsabhäshya),
should not have offered due salutation

BENEDICTORY.

3

Page 2.] We now proceed to explain the words of the text:
" Pranamya"—the prefix 'pra denoting intensity, the word
'pranamya* denotes such salutation as is accompanied by intense
devotion and confidence; as it is such a salutation alone which,
creating a merit, destroys the very seed (possibility) of obstacles.
It is for this reason that in the case of such works as K*dambar%
and the like, we find that they were left incomplete, even
though salutation had been offered at the beginning; and the reason for this lay in the fact of the salutation in these cases nothaving
been offered with due faith and devotion,—the absence whereof
is inferred from this very fact of the works being left incomplete.
In the present case, the salutation, though being done at
the 'present time, is yet, in reality, meant to precede the composition of the Padärtkadharmasatigrakz; andjt is for this reason
that we have the sequential affix 'ktva' (in'pranamya') ; but
this affix is used only with a view to establish a syntactical
relationship between the two ( the salutation and the composition), and not merely for the purpose of indicating the said
sequence; as there would be no useful purpose served by such
indication.
' Hetum'—by means of this word * hetu' without any qualifications, the author poiuts to the fact of God being the cause of
all created things.
* fgvaram'—this word denotes a particular deity ; as it is
only in this sense that the word is used in ordinary parlance ;
and this system of philosophy is meant to be a mere compilation of things ordinarily known to men.
* Munvm!—denotes a particular person of austere pennance,
who has had the darkness of ignorance destroyed by the pure _
knowledge of Self, and who is possessed of a complete knowledge
of the whole truth regarding all things; as it is only in this seose
that this word is generally found to be used.
this name was given to the sage, onaccouut

4

PRACASTAPÄDA BHAJSHYA—CHAP. I. SECTION (1).

of te subsisting, like a pigeon, upon grains fallen on the road
(the word being explained as kandn atti Hi) Consequently,
there can be no room fur the taun t—' may you eat mere grains
&c.' The revered Prac.asta-deva has used this word, simply because II formed the name of the sage; and not as a reason for
the excellence of the system as composed by such a person (as
lived on mere grains picked up from the road ) ; because such
excellence is directly cognisable by the fact of the acceptance of
the system by great men, just as is the case with the declarations of Manu and other sages. Nor is any useful purpose to be
served by making the system known as 'kaiiada-^astra' It might
be urged that, "by this means would be indicated the excellence
of the author's own work, as based upon the work of Kanada/'
jBut it is not so ; for it is true that the precedence of-such' aji
sthority adds to-the excellence of the author's own work ; but
it is quite possible for such a work being open to the suspicion
of being a statement of false doctrines; this suspicion bei ngj based
upon certain well known discrepancies in the character of the
a hor of the work. It might be argued that, u no human frailties could ever be suspected in the revered Pracastapäda whose
veracity is universally acknowledged." But, iu that c «se, just as in
the case of Kariäda's own work, people who saw him, as also the
direct disciples of these, accept it, only through their confidence
jua the author, and the other persons follow io the same path
through finding the declarations compatible with those of other
persons,—so, in the same manner, in the case of Pracastapada's
work also, his disciples and other persons would accept it; and
as such there would be no use of declaring the fact of the latter
work being based upon the former.
JLB for the question.—"why should there be a salutation of the
sage ?"—we have already said that such salutations are meant to
remove obstacles, just like the salutation to God. Nor can the
salutation of God also be taken as indicating the fact of the work
being based upon the work of God; because this would not be in

3ENEDICT0R7.
keeping with facts. A person is- found to begin all actions after
having saluted his own particular deity ; and he does not thereby mean that the actions are such as have bee a previously petformed by that deity ; specially as salutation is wholly the outcome of devotion and faith. As for instance, we find that^the
author of the Mhndnscl-värtika has saluted the moon-bearing
God, and certainly the Mlmärisä* philosophy has nob been composed by that God.
(
Anity—this particle indicates the fact of the salutation to
Kanada coming after that to Icvara, the meaning being—
'having in the beginning saluted Icvara, and then saluting
Kanada &c. &c.'
Uutil the connection and the purpose of a particular work are
fully understood the student does not pay any attention to it; as
the activity of all intelligent persons is always preceded by a full
recognition of the purpose to be fulfilled by that act; and if a work
do not give rise tosuchactivity,it would be as good as non-existent;
consequently, the author, at the very beginning of his work, lays
down, by means of the second half of the verse, the connection and
the purpose, both of which are oeeessary factors in the activity oi
the intelligent pupil.
' Padarthadharma &c.'—' Paddrthas' are the six categories,
Substance and the rest; the *dharmas' are the common and
specific properties of these; and that work which collects, or brings
together, or explains these is the ' Padärthadharmasangrafta.'
1
Pravakshyate'—-the promise of the author is that he will
propound an excellent work which will briefly explain the properties of the categories. The excellence of the work lies in
this, that the properties of things which in other works, are explained very extensively and at random, are, here, explained
briefly and in one place; this is the motive that hns led the
author to the composing of the work, while there already existed other works treating of the same subject.

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. I. SECTION <1).
__j
Obj. " A collected treatment of the properties of things is
"the cause of the due knowledge of these properties; but such
"knowledge cannot be the desired end of mac ; as the sole end of
"man lies either in the obtaining of pleasure or in the avoiding
"of pain. Consequently the work not accomplishing any desire
"of man, cannot be a fit object for acquiring".
In reply to this we have the word 'mahodayah' which
indicates the fact of the work effecting the desired end of man.
The word means—that toork from, which results the highest result, in the shape of Deliverance. This also implies that the work
bears to the Properties, the relationship of the Denoter and the
Denoted, and to the Highest Result, that of the Cause and Effect.
Question: " Well, what is this highest result ?"
In answer to this, (1) some people (the Bauddas) declare it to
be the cessation of all knowledge along with all impressions,
tendencies and longings. But this is not correct; because no
intelligent person could ever act towards the total destruction
of the self which is the dearest of all things; also because the
word 'mukti, (Deliverance), which is synonymous with the
destruction of bondage, does not mean the said cessation or
destruction.
6

(2) Others (the Vedäntis) explain it as the appearance of
pure knowledge free from all objective taint, following on the
destruction of all impressions &c This too is not right; as this
could not be possible in the absence of an efficient cause. The
cause of such knowledge consists in an augmentation of Retentiveness; and the nature of this is .such that, in the absence of
a permanent substratum, it cannot produce any particular effect;
and it at every moment, it were to appear as something new, then,
in as much as it would be undergoing a total destruction at every
moment, like the practice of leaping, it could not have gained
in power; and as such it could not be able to produce any clear
cognition; and hence there would be no possibility of such a

BENEDICTORY.
cognition ; specially as of the conditions of the mind as tainted
(by objectivity), the inborn capability of producing homogenous,
or like, effects aod the incapability of producing unlike ones, could
never be sec aside. Then again, in as much as ail the previous
states of the mind are naturally evanescent, the state that is herein
spoken of would be something quite different from these. Nor
is there any such single ' series ' wherein both of these could
exist; and yet Bondage and Deliverance both belong to one and
the same substratum; and these two, according to you, would refer
to two distinct objects, while, as a matter of fact, that state of
mind which cases is the same that has been functioning before.
(3) Others (the Sänkhyas) hold that after the difference between Matter and Spirit has been duly perceived, the functioning
of Matter ceases, and the Spirit rests in Its own nature; and it is
this that is Deliverance. This also is not correct; because Matter,
beiug by its very nature active, could never rest idle (indifferent,
without functioning). It might be argued that—' the functioning of Matter is caused by the purpose of the Spirit; and this
purpose being none other tjian the perception of the said difference,
as soon as this perception appears, Matter, having accomplished
its purpose, would cease to function." But this could not be ;
• as Matter being un-iotelligent, could not function with any such
discrimination (as would be necessary in accordance with the
Sänkhya theory). In fact, we find that even when it has duly
brought about a certain perception,—of sound, for instance—, it
still goes on functioning towards the same perception ; and in the
same way, even after it will have brought about discriminative
knowledge, it would go on with its functioning towards the same
end; as its active nature will not have been set aside (by the
said knowledge.}
(4) Others (the Yogis) again hold Deliverance to consist in
an experience of ever-lasting and unsurpassed pleasure. But
this view also has nothing to recommend itself; as we shall show
later on.

g

PRACASTAPÄDA BHÄSHY*V~CHAP. I. SECTION (1).

(5) For these reasons, we conclude that the "highest
result M consists in the absolute cessation of pain.
Question : " What is the proof of the existence of this cessation of pain*"
In reply to this, the Naiyayikas put forward the following
syllogism: 'The series of pain, being something qualified, is destroyed absolutely, because it is a series,—just like the seriesof ligiit
rays emitted l>y the lamp.' But this is not satisfactory; as the
argument is directly contradicted by the case of the series of the
colour &c. of tho atom of earth and other substances ( which
are never destroyed). Therefore we maintain that the proof of
the said cessation lies in such Upaniskat texts as 'Him without
a body, pleasure and pain do not touch.'
Objection:—"All these Upanishat passages refering merely to
the natural state of things cannot have any evidential authority."
Reply :—Not so ; as the same might be said against the
authority of Sense-perception (which also pertains to the natural
state of things).
Obj.: "What we mean, is that sentences describing the
natural state of things would be merely descriptive, and as such
devoid of evidential authority ; because these would depend upon
the authority of something else ; as such a description in itself
could never be the efficient means of any correct cognition."
Rep:—A passage cannot be regarded as descriptive simply
because it speaks of things in their fully accomplished states;
as in that case even Sense-perception would have to be regarded
as merely descriptive. In fact it is only when it speaks of something that is already kuown, that a passage is regarded as descriptive. And as a matter of fact we find thatthe matter dealt with
by the Upanishat passages in question is such as is never cognised
by Sense-perception or the other means of knowledge; and under
the circumstances, how could these passages be regarded as merely descriptive ? How too could they ever stand in need of the

BENEDICTORY.
eoroboration of any other means of knowledge? Specially as in the
case of tbesepassages, the cognition produced by them is not found
to be necessarily preceded by any other cognition of the same object, as we have in the eise oi' Remembrance (which for this reason
is not regarded as an independent means of knowledge). In fact
it is on this ground that human assertions are regarded as authoritative. These human assertions too do not bring about the
cognition of things, through an indication of the trustworthiness
of the speaker; but they do so independently of the speaker,
depending upon the speaker only for their own appearance (and
not for their faculty of producing cognitions), as the capability
of expressing things is inherent in the word, and inherent
also, in these expressed things, is the capability of being related
to one another, either by mufuil requirement, or by proximity,
or by capability. Consequently, just as in the case of the Veda,
the word is accepted as producing the cognitions of things, independently of any other means of knowledge,—so in-the case of
ordinary human assertions; as, according to the maxim—' ye
laukikd vaidlkästa eva' ('the words of the ordinary human
assertion are the same as those in the Veda'), the potency of
the word must be the same in both cases. As for the inquiry
into the trustworthiness of the speaker, it is simply meant to set
aside the possibility of error with regard to facts ; just as in the
case of Sense-perception also, we look out for the purity and
soundness of the sense-orgao, simply for the sake of setting
aside all doubts as to the erroneous character of the cognition.
We have briefly dealt with this here; for a detailed treatment of the subject, we refer the reader to the Advaynsiddhi.
Page 5.] Objection:—"The authority of words is restricted
" to something that has tö be accomplished, and not to the mere
" nature of things as they exist; specially as in the case of all
"usages of old experienced people, we find that words have
"their expressive potency only when there is something to be

IQ

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. I. SECTION. (1).

" accomplished, and not otherwise. Consequently the Upanishat
" passages cannot be taken as referring to the natural, state
of things/1
Reply:—This is not admissible; as in ordinary parlance we
ofcen find a sentence applying to the natural state of things,—
e. <?. the assertion, 'the mango produces good effects, aud the jack
fruit brings undesirable ones.'
Objection:—" In the case of this sentence also, wha-t it does
" is to lay down the eating of the mango, aud the avoiding of
*' the jack fruit, the meaning of the sentence being—' eat the
" mango which produces desirable effects, and avoid the jack fruit
" which leads to evil consequences ' ( hence in this sentence also
" there is no mere description of the natural state of things)"
Reply :—It is not so; as any such laying doion would be
useless; because the man is naturally attached to the eating of
the mango; by the mere cognition of the fact of its producing good
effects ; similarly is he repulsed from the eating of the jack fruit
by the cognition of the fact of its leading to evil consequences.
And as such, wfcutwoul 1 be the necessity of any iujunctionin this
case, where the necessary attraction and repulsion are acomplidhed by tbe nature of the things themselves 1 specially as an injunction has its use only in a case where its object has not been
accomplished by some other means.
Objection:—u The sentence must he regarded as used for the
"purpose of liying down the said attraction and repulsion,^as
" it is with the purpose of such attraction and repulsion that it is
" always found to be used."
Reply:—True ; the sentence does serve the purpose of
attraction and repulsion ; but it does this only as the originator of
these, anreLaot as their (verbal) denoter; artod the evidential authority of words rests only with accomplished things. If, from the
' mere fact of the sentence being used for the purpose of the said attraction and repulsion we were to infer the fact of t>hese two being
verbally denoted by the sentence,—even though they are not

BENEDICTOJRY.

]_ i

cognised as directly expressed by the words,—then, in that case,
even such things as the feeling of satisfaction following on the
eating of the mango, and its digestion, would also have to be
regarded as expressed by the sentence; aod iu the case of Sense«
perception also, when its object would be such as is desired for the
sake of the fulfil ment ofa certain purpose, it would be thisfulfilment
that would have to be regarded as the object of. that sensuous
cognition. As for the fact of the sentence being the originator
of activity, even the Upanisfaxt texts inquestion are such originators; as when one has recognised the true nature of a thing by
means of these, he has recourse to the practice of meditation &c,
which brings about a pure knowledge of the Self, free from ail
doubts and uncertainties; from which knowledge proceeds final
Deliverance. Nor is it necessary that the operation of all
means of knowledge should always end in activity or cessation
from activity; as the3e being dependent upon the wish of the
agent, even when they are not brought about, we have a distinct
perception resting in the thing itself.
Nor is the denotative potency of words restricted to only
such objects as are related to some action ; as we often find words
applying to things not so related; e.g. in the sentence "iha
prabhinnakamalodarerrmdhüni madkukarah pib<tti (withinthis
full blown lotus, the bee is drinking the honey)", which describes
an occurence at the present moment, we rind that one who
knows the meaning of the other words, but does not know that
of the word ' madhükarah', comprehends this word as denoting
that insect which he finds drinking the honey ( and in this case,
the word does not denote anything that is related to an action.)
Objection:—"In this case also, there is au indirect relation"ship with an action; as the person who utters the sentence has
"known the meaning of the word 'madhukarah' only by notici n g tbe actions of older people ".
Reply :—Not so; as there can be no certainty with regard

12

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. I. SECTION (1).

to this; that is to say, there is no certainty as to whether the
man who utters the sentence had obtained the knowledge of
the meaning of the word, with reference to the object as related
to a certain action of older people, or from its co-extensivness
with otber words knowu to him, or from the direct teaching
(of an older person) with regard to the thing by itself (independently of any action) ; specially as there is no knowing
which of these factors enters first into the comprehension of the
meaning of a word. Then, in accordance with what you hold,
the speaker of the- sentence would have his comprehension with
reference to the object as related to the action, while the hearer
would have it with reference to it as not so related ; and as one
person does not comprehend the meaning of a word by means
of the comprehension of another person, the word 'madhukarak'
would have the two mutually inconsistent characters of having
its denotation related, as well as not related, to an action, as
with reference to the two persons.
Objection :—" The mutual relationship among the meanings of words in a sentence is based upon the requirements of the
verb denoting an action ; and hence there could be no such relationship in the case of the quoted Upaniuhat text which is devoid
of verbs."
Reply :—All Upanishaf texts .are not devoid of verbs ;
an4 even in the case of those that have no verb, there is a
distinct relationship among the things that are denoted by the
words as connected with one another, and are qualified by capability and pro*4mity (to other words).—such relationship being
based upon the mutual requirement of these denotations. For
instance, in the sentence
' känchyclmidänim tribhuvanatilako räjä'—w« are fully cognisant of a connected meaning of
the sentence, though there is no Verb. Or, in such cases the
relationship may be said to be based upon such verbs as 'asti'
or 'bhavati' which may be either distinctly mentioned or only
inferred indirectly.

PURPOSE OF THE SCIENCE.

13

This by the way ; to return to the original subject: A collection of the categories is obtained only by means of a due knowledge of the properties of the categories ; as there could be no
collection of the properties \>y themselves alone.
SECTION ( 2 )
PURPOSE OF THE SCIENCE.
Objection :—"A treatise that deals with the properties of
things can never lead to the highest bliss ; as words cannot
accomplish anything besides the denoting of the verbal
meanings."
In reply to this we have the following, wherein it is shown
that a treatise that supplies a knowledge of the properties of
things helps, indirectly, in the fulfilment of the highest end of
man.
Text (1):—A knowledge of the true nature of the six categories—Substance, Quality, Action, Generality, Individuality and Inherence—through
their similarities and dissimilarities,—is the
means of accomplishing the highest bliss.
Commentary.
The 'nature' of a thing is that which constitutes its character. 'Similarity' consists in properties common to many things ;
'Dissimilarity' consists in the property peculiar to a certain
thing. The knowledge leading to the highest result is that of
the true nature (of the six categories) as manifested through
their similarities and dissimilarities.
The pleasure born of the experiencing of sensuous objects
disappears in a moment, and abounds in pain ; and even when
enjoyed in Heaven and such other places it is not lasting, and is
subject to varying grades; for instance, some people enjoy the
pleasures of heaven alone, others enjoy those of the Kingdom of
Heaven. Consequently even this pleasure,—mixed as it is with a

14

?RA£ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. I. SECTION (2).

constant dread of falling off from it, as also with the heart-burning
caused by the superiority of another person,—13 found to oe
shrouded with pain; and as such cannot be called 'absolute blissJ
It is only the absolute cassation of pain, which coasists in the
disappearance of ail pains hard to be borne, that can be called 3uch
bliss ; specially because it does not allow of the return of those
pains. And it is thia bliss that is brought about by the knowledge of the true nature of Substance and the other categories.
The above meets the following declaration of Mandana's :
"The theory that Deliverance consists in the cessation of a
particular quality does not differ from the theory that it*is
nothing more than annihilation." Because the cessation of a
particular quality enables the Self to enjoy its own independent
natural state; and it does not mean its annihilation, which could
not be possible for the Self, which is eternal.
Nor can such delirerance be deemed to be desirable for
man; as the cessation of ail pain is the highest end that can be
desired by him.
Page 7.] Objection:-*"In as much aa such deliverance as you
put forward would mean the absence of all pleasure, it could not
be desirable."
Reply:—-Not so; because ordinary pleasure also is included
in paiu for the following reasons; (1) because it is not lasting; (2)
because having many contradictory forces, it is accompanied by the
trouble of bringing together the endless accessories necessary for
its accomplishment; (3) because it is always connected with pain,
and as such ressemoles the hooey that is mixed with poison.
The text "rf substaTice .&c." supplies the answer to the
question as to the knowledge of the similarities and dissimilarities of what things is the means of final beatitude.
The compound "dravyagiina &o" is to be expounded as a
Dvandva—' Dravyäni ca Sc.\ ia accordance with the fact of
each of these being mentioned distinctly in the sutra, where they

PURPOSE OF THE SCIENCE.
are enumerated separately. Because the mention of these in the
present context is with the same view as their enumeration in
ehe 8ütra.
Dravya, Substance, is mentioned first; because, being the
substratum of .all the rest, it is the most important of all. Guna,
Quality, is mentioned next, because its number is larger than that
of Karma, Action. Karma is mentioned after Gunay because
it always follows in the wake of this latter. Sämänya, Generality
is mentioned next, because it is connected with Karma. In
as much as Samaväya, Inherence, inheres in all the other five,
it is proper that it should be mentioned last; it is for this same
reason that Vifesha, Individuality is mentioned before Samaväya.
Abhävaf Negation, is not mentioned separately, simply because it is dependent (for its conception) upon Bhdva (the six
categories enumerated ), and not because there is no such cateThe genitive (in 'dravya... samaväyänäm') denotes general
relationship.
Here also the declaration that the knowledge of similarity
&c. is the means of highest beatitude implies that such beatitude is brought about by a true knowledge of the categories
themselves; as there could be no knowledge of the said similarity &c. independently of the categories.
NOTES.—(l)The enumeration of these categories is meant to be a complete
analysis of the entire universal scheme, including Qod Himself. The first three
ct" these have real objective existence, and as such form one group; the last
three are the product« of our conception.
(2) The word 'fadärtha* literally means "meaning of a word'; hence *'anything capable of being spoken of by means of a word', 'aaineable*. Same writers
have rendered it as 'knowable,' 'pr^dicable.' Thus though 'nameable* would be
the most appropriate rendering of the word, yet, in as much a« the introduction
of auch a word in. the course of a discussion would create confusion, the word
'category' has been retained, though its u*e is open to objection. The word
'padärtha' ia used very loosely, often in the senae of ' theme.'
(3) " Nyttya writings do not expiaiu the process by which the aevenfold
division of padärthas was first obtained; but, if we make a guess, the process
must have been something like this : A. notion is either positive or negative,
and so the external object of a notion might be bhava or ubhdva. Bhava things
again, are of two kind«, properties and a common substratum in which they
reside. The latter is dravi/a. Of the properties again, some reside in many
objects conjointly, others in individual thiuga singly. The first is Sämänya ;
while the latter class is again divisible into properties that are stationary, and
those that are evanescent—i. e. guna and karma. The remaining two padcu'ihai
are accepted to account for Bpecial fact»." (Y. V. Athalye^.

Iß

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. I. SECTION (3).
SECTION ( 3 )

SOURCE OF KNOWLEDGE.
Text (2)—This knowledge proceeds from dharma manifested by the injunctions of the Lord.
Commentary.
Objection:—"If the knowledge of truth be the means of final
beatitude, then dharma could not be the means of it; and this
would involve a contradiction of the sütra, wherein it is declared
that dhtirma is that which leads to final beatitude."
It is in reply to this objection that we have the present text.
The sense of this is that the said beatitude results from dkarma
alone; the knowledge of Substance and the rest beiug regarded as
the means to it, only in so much as such knowledge brings abont
dharma. That is to say, when ail objects, internal and external,
have been duly known, the man comes to notice the evils connected with them and hence acquires an aversion to them; his
desire for such things having thus ceased, the man who has
obtained a knowledge of the self ceases to perform action'«for
the acquiring of those objects, and betakes himself, without any
desire for results, to the practice of those means that are laid
down in the scriptures as calculated to bring about the due renunciation of those objects; and continuing the due practice
of self-knowledge, he accumulates an excellent dharma conducive
to the said renunciation; and the self-knowledge being thereby
fully accomplished, it becomes possible for him to be severed,
absolutely and permanently, from the shackles of the body.
Even in ordinary life we find worldly people renouncing or avoiding such uudesiralile things as a serpent, a thorn and the like,—
such avoidauce resulting from an effort on his part, which is due toa
determination arising from the recognition of the evils following
from those things. In the same manner, the absolute renunciation
of the body &c. can proceed only from a similar property of the self \
(i. e. its efforts) arising from a determination resulting from J
the person's recognition of the evils attendant upon those things.
This weshall explain under the section on ' Moksha.'
I

ENUMERATION AND CLASSIFICATION OF CATEGORIES.

17

Dhavma too, by itself, does not accomplish final beatitude,
uiiDil it is aided l»y the wish of God ; it is for this reason that we
have ti»e text—On If/ from dharma manifested by the injunctions of the Lord:l Codauä' ( Injunctiou ) is that whereby
things are led or urged to their respective functianings. ' Igvnracodanä' is a particular desire or a wish of God. c Abhivyavtl* ( mainfestation ) is the turning towards the fulfilment of
the effect. ' Fgv iracodanäbhivyuktät' means * manifested by
the injunction of the Lord.' The sense of the sentence thus comes
to be that ' final beatitude results from dharma which is turned
towards fruition by a particular wish of the Lord.'
The particle ' ca ' indicates that it is this dharma along
ivith the knowledge of the similarity &c. that brings about final
beatitude.
NOTB :—The Kiranävali takes lqvzr&—codanä' in tliß sense of 'Veda,' which •
according to the Naiyäyika and the Vai$exHka, is a woiK of God, and nut an 'independent,' eternal entity, ad'4ieid by the Mlmauiaha.
CHAPTFR II.
SECTION (1).
ENUMERATION AND CLASSIFICATION OF CATEGORIES.

Having understood the fact of the knowledge of the six
categories being the means of the accomplishment of the desirable end of man, the disciple puts the following question, in order
to know the difference among the six categories themselves :—
Text (3) Queation:—" Which are the categories, 'substance
and the rest'1 And what are their 'similxrities
and dissimilarities' \"
Answer:—Among these the Substances are—Earth, Water,
Light, Air, Ether (Mäga), Time, Space, Self
and Mind. These, mentioned in the sütru
by their general as well as specific names,
are nine only ; as besides these none other la
mentioned by name. (I—j-i—5),
^.«—No. 1. Vol. XXVI.—January 1904.

J8

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHASHYA— CHAP. 2. SECTION (1)
Commentary.

** Which are the categories &c!'—i. e. which are the substances, which the properties, which the actions, and so forth.
And in as much as the cognitiou of the object does not necessarily
include the cognition of its qualifications, the further question
is added—" What are their similarities <&c" Herein also the
particle ' ca' has the collective force.
The Text supplies the answer to these questions : Among
these—i. e. among substance and the rest—the substances,
Earth and the rest, have beeu mentioned by the sätra, by their
general name of ' Substance,' as well as by their specific names,
'Earth,' 'Water/ &c.
Then there aiises the question as to whether these are the
only substances, or there are others also; and the Text
declares that they are nine only.}
Objection:—" The very fact of only nine substances being
defined would have shown clearly that there are only nine
substances ; and hence the addition of'nine only/ appears quite
superfluous."
Reply:—It is not so; as even though only nine would be
defined, yet «there would remain the doubt as to whether the
omission of others was due to the fact of there being uo others,
of to that of their being of no use (though existing). Specially
as all that the definition does is to aid ordinary usage by the
differentiation of the like from the unlike, and as such it could
not establish the non-existence of anything (besides the nine
substances): it is for this reason that we have the text
restricting the number of substances to ' nine only/
This specific mention of things that have been once mentioned by means of a generic term is what in ather systems is
called * Vibhäga' (Division), or lNirdeca' (Indication).
Question.—" How is it known that there are only nine
Substances ?".

ENUMERATION AND CLASSIFICATION OF CATEGORIES.

19

Answer.—As besides tlieae none other is mentioned by
name.—That is to say, besides these nine, the great Rishij
Kanada, who was giving out his teaching with regard to all
things, his not mentioned (in his sutra) the name of any other.
P&ge $-1 Objection:—" There is a distinct substance in the
shape of Darkness {Tamas), which is endowed with the qualities
of colour, number, dimension, isolation, distance, proximity,
conjunction and disjunction."
To this some people make the following reply :—'If Darkness were a substance, then a person walking in the dark would
be obstructed by it; as a substance that has colour and form
can never be devoid of touch; aud a substance* that is large and
is endowed with touch is sure of offering an obstruction. Then
again, just as in the case of the Earth-globe, people are cognisant of its constituent parts, so should they also be of those of
Darkness.'
This answer is not quite satisfactory ; because in the case of
the light emitted by a lamp, we find that when certain rays of light
are thrown out from it, they give rise, through the force of a
certain unseen force, to an unimpeded circle of diffused light,
whose constituent parts are not perceived, and which is not
perceptible to the touch ; and in the same manner would the
substance of Darkness be constituted by the atoms of
Darkness (and would not be tangible).
For this reason, we offer another reply to the above argument (in favour of Darkness as a distinct substance) : Are the
atoms of Darkness endowed with touch, or devoid of it ? They
cannot be regarded as eadowed with it, as we never come across
any such products of it as wouM be perceptible by touch. It
nvght be argued that the said atom? do not produce any such
substances, because of the absence of an unseen force tending
towards such production. But., in that case, it would be equally
reasonable to accept Air to have colour; the absence of
coloured products of it being explained as being due to the

20

PRACASTAPÄDA BHlSBYA-CHAP. II. SECTION (1).

absence of the action of an unseen force favouring such production. Or, we might even assume all the four effect» ( Earth,
Water, Air and Light) to i»e produced from a single ato», through
the peculiar actioos of the unseen force.
It might be argued that, u the existence of atoms is
inferable only form their products ; and as such being inferred
from them, they cannot differ from these products; specially as
there would be no reasonable ground for admitting of such
difference."
But in that case, the atoms of Darkness also being devoid
of touch, how could they produce any such auhstauce as Dark*
ness ? as it is a fact of common experience th;»t that which is
without touch never producei any substances.
Objection :—'When we come across an effect, we naturally
assume the existence of a homogenous cause ; and it is not
right to upset or deny the character of the product to that which
is actually seen, simply because of some discrepancy in the
nature of its cause."
Reply :—We do not deny the existence of Darkness ; ail
that we assert is that, in as much as we do not find any productive cause for Darkness as a substance, and as all that we
actually see in Darkness is mere blacknessy it cannot be
regarded as a substance.
Obj: " In that case, Darkness would be cognised as mere
absence 0/light."
Reply: Not so; because any such mere absence of light
could never appear as black, endowed with the positive quality
of black colour ; while as a matter of fact, even at mid-day
we see darkness as black and moving and pervading over
things. Then again, in the case of all perception of negation
(or absence), we find that it is perceived only when its counterentity is perceived, and then too, through the negation of its
contrary, and as qualifiing something connected with that counter-entity ; and no absence is ever cognised independently by

ENUMERATION AND CLASSIFICATION OF CATEGORIES.

9\

itself. In the case of Darkness on the other hand, we find that
at the time that it is cognised, there.is no cognition of anything
eUe AS its counter-entity ; nor is its cognition in the form of a
negation. Consequently it canuot be regarded as the mere
absence of light.
Nor can its perception be regarded as one of light only; as
it is always outwardly cognised as 'darkness' and 'shadow',
and black in colour ( which can never apply to light which is by
its very nature ivhite). For these reasons, we must regard
darkness as a. particular colour (or form) which pervades on all
sides, when there is no light. And during the day too, the
blackness that is perceived is that enclosed above the eye-ball—
as we shall explain later on.
In a case where the ahsence of light occupies a fixed position, the blackness attaching to that place is cognised as 'shadow.'
It is for this reason that we have ideas of long, short, large and
small with reference to shadows; as that which is cognised is
the blackness extending over the place ( and as such capable of
being spoken of as ' longf &c.)
In case darkness be regarded as mere absence (of light), it
would be impossible to explain the application of such positive
epithets with regard f.o it. It is with a view to this that we
Lave the declaration—'Experienced people do not regard darkness
as mere absence of light; specially as the Puränas have spoken
of the bladcness of shadow, as a qualification of the earth. Then
again, in regard to shadows, we find that it follows in the wake
of the body (casting the shadow), and appears as distant and near
large and small, moving and standing,—all which would not be
possible unless it were a positive eutity.' It would also be difficult to explain the fact of the shadow being mistaken as a black
snake; and so also would be the notion of * moving', which is
caused by the cognition of colour; in places where there happens
to be an absence of light, the idea of motion is due to the
moving of the substance that shuts off the light (and casts the
shadow).

22

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA— CHAP. II. SSCTION (1).

Similarly the ideas of Distance, Proximity, &c. in connection
with Darkness may he explained away (without necessitating the
assumption of an independent substance).
ID this perception of Darkness, which is a particular form
manifested by the absence of light, the perceptive potency
must be regarded as resting in the eye independent of the action
of any external light; as such perception is* always found tobe
concomitant with such an organ; just in the. same way as you
regard the. absence of light as the cause (<frf the perception
of Darkness).
Objection: "Such a theory would be contrary to the
Sütra which declares that darkness must be regarded as the
absence of light, because of the difference in the manifestation
of its substance, quality and action."
Reply: There is no contradiction; as Darkness has been
spoken of (in the Sütra) as the 'absence of light" simply because
it. is ouly in the absence of light that it is perceived.
( Mere difference in the number of qualities cannot justify
the admission of darkness as a distinct substance by itself; as)
God also being endowed with budhhit is accepted as ' self; and
the self wth six qualities (i.e the supreme Self)is not regarded as
wholly distinct from the self with fourteen qualities (i. e. the
human self); as any such distinction would be unreasonable in
view of the released human self (which having become merged
in the supreme Sell has only six. qualities).
KOTES.—Kuniärila and his followers maintain Darkness ( Tatnas } to be a
distinct substance. They argue that the moat general and accurate differentia
of Substances is that they are endowed with some pro per tie» and have some
sort of action ; and thta definition applies to Darkuess, which being black haa
the distinct quality of colour, and moves, thus having a definite action. It cannot
be included in any of the nine substances accepted by the Vaiqeshika. VaicesJiika
writers in general regard Darkness as mere absence of liyhtt and base their
rejection of the Mim >naaka theory on the ground that if Darkness had any
real colour it would require Light for its manifestation. This objection though
very plausible (n the surface loses its force when we come to look into the
matter a little deeper, and find that no Darkness can be perceived un'eas there
is light somewhere to see it off. But it is true that the Eye does not need the
aid of light in the perception of darkness. That is the reason why our Commentator has declared it to be a positive quality, perceptible by the eye in
dependency of the aid of light. The Prabhdkaras hold that Darkness is the absence
of the knowledge.^f light. Some extremists have gone to the length of denying
Light as a substance and holding it to be an absence of Darkness, which fatter
they accept as a substance. Some people have put forwaid cakti 'Force'as
a diatiuct substance ( Vide Nyäyamuktävali).

ENUMERATION AND CLASSIFICATION OF CATEGORIES.

23

Text (5) :—The qualities are :—Colour, Taste, Odour, Touch,
Number, Dimension, Separateness, Conjunction,
Disju7ictLony Distance, Proximity, Intellect, Pleasure, Pain, Desire, Aversion and Effort; tJtese
are the seventeen that are directly mentioned in
the Sütra. The word ' ca * (in the Sutra) however
indicates the other seven : viz: Gravity, Fluidity,
Viscidity, Faculty, the two-fold invisible Force
and Sound. These make up the twenty-four
qualties. (I.-i-G).
Commentary.
The seventeen qualities, Colour and the rest, have been,
distinctly named in the Sütra, and the word ' ca' indicates the
others, Gravity &c, which are ordinarily recognised as * qualities.' Thus the number of Qualities is twenty-four only. As
for the qualities of Bravery, Magnanimity, Compassion, Cleverness, Vanity and the like, all these are included in the aforesaid
twentyf»iur. For instance, Bravery is nothing more than an
inclination towards the subjugation of an enemy, even if he be
stronger than oneself; Magnanimity consists of the Intellect
as always tending towards the right path; Compassion is the
desire to alleviate th.3 sufferings of others ; Cleverness lies in
the Intellect directed towards the real state of things; Vanity
consists in an exaggerated idea of one's own greatness; and so
forth. The word ' adiyhta' (Invisible Force) includes virtue
and vice (dharma and adhamvt). The word (Sahslcdra*
(Faculty) includes speed, memory and elasticity.
Ohj: " If these words were to iüclude all these qualities,
then the number of Qualities would exeeod twenty-four."
Reyly: Not so; because all these three—viz. speed
meir.ory and elasticity—belong to the same class of( Faculty/ and
are regarded as oue only.
Objection: " In that case, the number of qualities would
not be twenty-four; as both Virtue and Vice belonging to the
same class of ' Adrshta' would also be regarded as one only."

21

PRAQASTAPADA BHASHYA—CHAP. II. SECTlOSf(I).

Reply: Not so; as there is no such class as ' adrshta*
Though the Qualities themselves are devoid of qualities (and
as such they could not be qualified by the number 'twenty-four'-,
yet they are spoken of as ' twenty-four,'—the number being applied to them indirectly, by reason of their being capable of
having distinctive features of their own (the number rea'ly
belonging to these features, and through them transferred to the
Qualities themselves).
NOTES. —(1) Quality ig defined as that which, being neither substance vor
action, is capable of generalities ; or, thac which, while inhering in substances,
is devoid of quality and action. Kanada ( Vaiqeskikasutra, I-i-l6) has defined
it as that which inhering in substances. 13 devoid of qualities, and ia an independent cause of conjunctions and disjunctions. It differs from Substance in
that, while the latter is capable of existing independently by itself, Quality can
never exist apart from Substance. And though Quality aud Action both inhe.e
i« Substance, the furtner is a per.i anent factor tu substances while the latter ia
evanescent. "We understand by Quality thac which truly constitutes the nature
of a thing—what it is,—what belongs to it permanently as a» individual or in
common with others like it,—not that which passes, which vanishes and answers
o no lasting judgment. A body falls: it i« a fact, an accident ; it ia heavy,,
that is quality "
(2) We meet with extensive discussions in various works as to the propriety
of the twenty-four—fold classification of qualities. But there is a general
agreement on the point that all qualities are included, in one way or the other,
in those enumerated among the twenty-four.
(3) Qualities are divided—(a) into Eternal and Evanescent, (b) into General
and Specific, and (c) coguisable by one aen»e, by two senses, or not cognisable by »
seuse organs.
(a) Those belonging
to eternal substances are eternal, and those in transient
substance3, evanescent.
(b) The General qualities are those that subsist conjointly in two or more
substances while the speci;c quality is that residing in only one
substance.
(c) The qualities apprehended by single sense-organs are colour, taste,
odjur and touch; those cognisable by two sense organs are dimension,
separateness, conjunction, disjunction, distance, proximity, lluidity
*nd viscidity; the super-sensuous are gravity, ad harm a, dharuaa and
faculty.
Text (6):—Throvjing upwards, Throwing downwards, Contracting, Expanding, and, Going—these are the
owl if five actions*, because of the mention of Goivg:
all such actions as Gyrating, Evacuating, Quivering, Flowing upwards, Transverse Fulling, Falli ng
downivards, Rising and the like, being only particular forms of Going, and not forming distinct
clawed by thewsdves. (I.-i-7).

ENUMERATION AND CLASSIFICATION OF CATEGORIES.

25

The author divides Actions; and lays down their number
AS five only.
In anticipation of the objection that, " there being other
actions in the shape of Gyrating &c. the limitation of the number to 'five only' is not proper/'—the author adds: 'Going'
includes <&c. That is to say, by the mention of 'going' the
number of actions becomes limited to five only : Iu support of
this we have the next sentence—f Gyrating' <kc. The sense of
this, is that in as much as Gyrating and the rest also are mere
forms of ' Going/ and not distinct classes by themselves, all
these become implied l>y the mention of 'Going'; and as such
ifc is only right tnat the number should be restricted to 'five'
only.
NOTES.—(1) Karma has been defined by Kanada (sütra I-i-17) as that which
'resides only in one substance, is devoid of qualities, and is the direct and
immediate cause of conjunctions and disjunctions.'
(2) Thefive-folddivision of Actions is thus explained : "Motion is primarily
divided into three kinds according to its direction, namely, vertical, horizontal
and slanting or miscellaneous." The Vertical Motion may be from below
upwards
(ut'.shepuna), (l)or froia above downwards, (avakshepana) (1). H<>rivontul "Motion
also may he two-fold, motion nearer to one's self {dkuncana) (31 or motion further
from one's s**If (prasärava) f4). All other motions are relegated to the comprensive class of *gamana" (5)[Y. V. Athalyej.
Text ( 7 )-.—Of Generality, or Community\ there are two
kinds ; the Hiqher and the Lower ; and it serves as
the basis of inclusive or comprehensive cognition.
The Higher (or Highest) Generality is that
of ' Being'; as it is this that extends over the
largest number of things; and also because it iff
this alone that is a Generality pure and simple,
always serving, as it does, as the basis of comprehensive cognitions. The Loiver Generalities
are' Substance' and the rest, which extend over
a limited number of things. These latter, being
the basis of inclusive an well as exclusive cognithms, are sometimes regarded as Individualities aUo. (I.-ii-l to 5).
The author proceeds to explain ' Generality ' (Sämänya):—
It is of tivo kinds, the Higher and the Loiver. The word 'ca'

26

PRA(?ASTAPÄDA BHASHYA—CHAP. IX. SECTION (1).

has the restrictive sense, indicating that there are only tivo
kinds. The form or nature of Generality is next explained :
It sei*ves as ike basis of inclusive cognitions. That is to say
that whichleads to the inclusion, in one form, of various totally
diffierent objects, is 4Sämänya,', Generality or Community.
The Highest Generality is put forward as 'Being'; and the
reason for regarding it so is that it extends over and includes a
number of things, larger than those included in the Generalities
of ' Substance' and the resfc. Then agaio, always forming the
basis of inclusive cognition, and never that of exclusive cognition ( as there is nothing that is not included *in 'Being' ), it
is'Generality'always; ' Substance'audtherest, on the other hand,
also serving tbe purpose of the excluding or differentiating of
things other than those in which they themselves inhere, are
Generalities, as well as Individualities. But 'Being* always
Serves the purpose of'inclusion'; and as such it is always Generality. Though it is true that 'Being' differentiates itself from
such entities as 'Generalities' and the like, yet it cannot, in any
case, exclude or differentiate, from these, the things wherein it
inheres: as these—Generality &c.—also are often recognised as
* being' or having an existence in themselves.
Page 12.] It is with reference to positive entities that
"•' Being' is spoken of as forming the basis of *inclusive cognition'; hence even though it serves to exclude non-entities, yet
that does not in any way militate against its said character.
Some people maintain that v»e speak of that alone as
'being' which is recognised by the means of cognition, and
never of that which is not so recognised; a)ad as such 'being' must
be regarded as cognisable by means of the'means of knowledge'.
But this is not right; as in that case the object in questiou
would have to be regarded as 'without being' (i. e. non-existent)
before the appearance of the means of cognition ; and then, in as
much as th it which would be non-existent, being like the 'hare's

ENUMERATION AND CLASSIFICATION OF CATEGORIES

27

born', could never be cognised (by any means), there would be
an interdependence between 'being' and the functioning of
the means of cognition (as neither could be ia operation without
the other); and lastly, in as much as it is only an existing means
of cognition that could appreheud ( an object), if existence ( or
being) were regarded to be that which is apprehended by these
means of cognition, then we would have to postulate an apprekender for the apprehending means of cognition also; and this
would have to go on ad infinitum.
Some people may argue thus: " We do not mean that
"Being consists in the connection of the means of cognition; what
"we mean is that it consists in that form of things which is
"capable of connection with the means of cognition. He also
•'who holds Being to be a Generality, will have to accept the
"natural form or state of things ; as in formless things, as the hare's
"horn /i., Being is not found to inhere. Under the circumstances
"we might as well rest with the nature of things ; what is the
4
use of postulating a * Being ' ?"
To this we make the following reply: The nature of each
thing being different from that of the rest, how could there be,
on that basis alone, any idea inclusive of them all, or any notion
of * singularity' with regard to them; specially as we could never
comprehend any relationship subsisting among an endless number of things ? If you admit of any one factor, such as is common
to them all, then that is all that we wish.
Obj: "la the case of the cow we find that one who has
. "seen a cow once, if he happens to see another cow, th-re appears
"in his mind an idea which resse.nbles his previous conception of
"the cow; but in a case where one who has seen the mountain
"happens to see a grain of mustard, certainly the idea appearing in his mind does not in the least resemble his previous conception of the mountain; consequently, bow could there be any
"Generality (such as ' Being ') iu the latter case ?"
Reply : In the case of the mountain and the mustard, do you

28

PRACASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. II. SECTION (1).

deny all Generality or Community because of the absence of an
absolute similarity between the two objects, or of that of evea a
partial similarity? if the former, then, you should deny the Generality or genus'cow'also ; as in the c-is-3 of two cows also, there
never is an absolute similarity,—>one, for instance, being black an 1
the other of a chequered colour* If you deny even partial similarity
between the mountain and the mustard,-—then that is scarcely
tenable ; as all such objects are always recognised as similar, on
t'ie ground of thair beim different from a non-entity. The ouly
difference however is this: ia the case .of two cows, the idea of
their belonging to the same generality or genus comes to the
mind quickly, on account of the similarity of many parts of the
two bodies; while, in the case of the mountain &c., the idea of
Generality takes some time to appear,—as the similarities being
very slight, the common character is not so easily perceptible ; as
for instance, when we see a water-jar, it takes some time for us
to realise that the earthenware cup belougs to the same class of
* Clay * as the jar.
The above sets aside the theory that \ Being * consists in
the ' cap tbllity of doing some xction for a definite purpose'
(Arthikriyälcäritva). Bicauss that which does not exist having no action, if it were to have an existence on the sole ground
of its having an action—in as much as the existence of that
action would also depend upon another action, there would be a
regressus ad infinitum,— in I then that would mean the nonexistence of all thipgs.
'Sucbstanee' and the rest constitute the lower Generality.
That is to siy, 'S ibstane?,' *Q-ulity,' an i ' A.ctiou' are the lower
Generalities or CUSS-JS,—^heir extensions» b3in£ smaller in their
scop? thai that of 'Baing.' In the same manner, in comparison
with ' Substance,' ' E irth ' &3. are the lower classes; and still
lower down we have the classes of 'jar' and the rest. In comparison with 'Quality,' the lower communities are those of
'Colour' and the like ; and similarly 'Throwing Upwards' is

ENUMERATION AND CLASSIFICATION OF CATEGORIES.

29

lower in comparison with the more general class of 'Action;.'
aud so forfch.
Some people bring forward the following objection : " As a
"matter of fact we find that when one perceives fire after
"baviug seen water, he is never cognisant of-any sameuess (or
"similarity) between the two; and as such we cannot admit
"of any such class as ' Substauce' (to which both of them are
''held to belong)."
Page 13—Reply: There is not much weight in this argument;
as both fire and vvater are capible of biing cognised by themselves; and the character of 'substance' consists only of this
capability of independent cognition. Even in the case of Throwing Upwards &c we recognise them as motion ; and it 13 in this
that the coguition of * Action' consists. In the case of. Colour
&c. also, one, who has subscribed to the conversion of .naming
them, 'Quality' cannot escape the conviction that all of them
are included in the teirn 'Quality'; and this inclusive conviction
makes a denial of the class 'Quality' an impossibility. The basis
of this conviction lies in the due comprehension of the conventional name, as wall as the porceptiou of the pirticular individual quality; just as for the cognition of ßrahmanahoodywe
have a basis in the recognition of the parentage. In the case
of this latter, even though the Br-ihm wrahoo 1 of one born of
pure Brahmana parents is interlaced with his very birth, yet it
is not perceptible, as any thing particularly distinguishing him
form the Kshatriya and the rest,—by means of the senses alone ;
because the slight difference is not apptre<it, being lost in the
extreme similarity between tho two iniividual bodies (of the
Brahmana aud the Kshatriya); but yheu one comes to know,
through tradition, of the pure Brahmana parentage t> which the
person belongs, then the Brahmanahood comes to be recognised
even by the senses {i. e. when one's parentage is known, whenever he is seen, he is at once seen as a ßrähmana).ßim\\a.r\y it is
only a person versed in the science of Generalities who perceives,

30

PRAQASTAPÄDA SHÄSHYA—CHAP. II. SECTION (1).

by his senses, the several kinds to which the genus belong, which
cannot be done by an ordinary person ; but that does not prove
that there are QO different kinds of Generalities ; nor can tlte perception of the learned be denied the character of Perception.
Against the recognition of Brahmauahood, some people bring forward the £v:t of worn MI being naturally uustetdy in their virtue,
which would make the parentage of the child open to doubt.
But this Is not light; as the characters of women being duly
guarded by all intelligent persons, it could not be at all difficult
to ascertain ths parentage. Many are the ways that have been
laid down for protecting tha chastity of worn jn. We desist from
any further profitless discussions and counter-discussions.
These classes of 'substance* and the rest, serving the purpose of differentiating their own substrates from tbose of other
classes, come to be known as 'Individualities' also, and are not
regarded as mere 'Generalities' serving as the basis of inclusive
cognition alone. The sense of ' apt in the Text is that while
they are known as 'Generalities,* they a»e known as^ 'Individualities' also. The sense of all this is that the name of 'Generality' applies directly to these, as they are all capable of serviug
as the basis of inclusive cognition, and as such naturally amenable to the definition of'Generality,; while the name of'Individuality* applies to'them only indirectly ( or secondarily, figuratively),—this application being based upon the etymologic»» 1
meaning of the word ' Viceska' ('Individuality,' or'species')—vis:
that 'whwh differentiates, or specialises, its substrate from all
other things. It may be noted that this etymological meaning
applies to the final Individualities or species also.
(1) 'Sä many a' is the abstract noun formed from the word 'Samana' 'equal'
or 'similar'; and thus it stands for the property that tend« to make ceruin
thing« to be regarded aa 'Similar'; heuce the common characteristic belonging to
many individuals. It is for this reason that the word can be rendered only by
such words as ' generality ' or * commonality.' The latter word would, perhaps,
have been preferable ; but it would be an uncommon word to use ; hence we
have adopted the word * generality.'
(2) Kanada (Sutra 1—ti—3) has declared that Sämänya is 'Buddhyapelcsha*
i «. it depeuds upon our conceptions ; if we conceive of a certain property as belonging in common to many objects, then it becomes a Sämänya ; while if we
think of it ouly as an individual property, it become* a Viceaha or Specific property.

ENUMERATION AND CLASSIFICATION OF CATEGORIES.

3J

(3) Sämänra is that which while being eternal resides in many tkingtr. Thus
it has come to he used aa synonymous to Jdi.i. commonly rendered »3 ' Class or
Genus' ; but 'Jäti is ouly one form of Sämänya which han been caUed the 'Akkancia',
a» distinguished from the ' Sakhandu,' Sämänya. The ' Sakkanda Sän/äuya is al
called * npädhi' which u distinguished from *jdti ' in that, while the latter is related to the individual object directly, the former ia related to it only indiretUy, or
through something else.
(4) All common characteristics do not necessarily constitute so many Jätis.
The couditioua which invalidate a Jäti are sa'd to be tbe*e : (a) when the object
13 one only, it camiot be regarded aa a ' Class' ; e. «!7. äkäqa, {b) mere verbal difference does not constitute difference in cl«i«e ; f. i. G/tatatva ' caunot be regarded AH a cl»ss different from ' Kulacutva * ( c ) Overlapping cros?»-di vision f. i.
'bAüttttvii and ' martatva,' cannot be accepted as distinct du »»es, (d) A Jäti canno
he regarded as constituting another, ' Jäti'; as that would lead to an en dies« series
of a^sumutiou«. F i. ' Xarutvatea cannot be reg«idedas « das», (e) Qualikies that
are by their very nature specific cann«*t be regarded aa a cluss \ as that would be
coutrary t«» the nature of things. (/) Want of proper relationship invalidates any
nach claäü ;is ' S<tmuvnyatva ' as the Samuvayas could not bear the relationship
that fjuwdiats between the cla*j and the individuals. These therefore are not regarded as Jätis but only as upndhis.
(5) The ilifio*rence between 'Jäti and upndhi' com*«» to be that while the
latter name may he given to any property that belong« to a number of things,
one or mauy, the former can apply, to only such aa belongs to things more thau one,
and which is eternal. It is thus that while '«/alt "can belong to Substances,
Qualities and Actions only, 'Iffädhi' can reside in all the six categories. The Jäti
of a thing is natural, inborn and hence eternal; while the Upädhi is adventitious,
circumstantial, and hence evanescent.
Text (8): The ultimate specialising factors inhering in
eternal substayices are the Individualities.
In
as much as they serve the purpose of absolute exclusion, they are Individualities, pure and simple.
Commentary.
Those that are sure to inhere, and in eternal substances
alone, are the Individualities. The qualification 'inhering in
eternal substances alone! serves fco exclude Substance, Quality,
Action and Generality ; as the former three of these inhere in substances alone, but not in eternal substances only; and as for
Generalities, they are not such as inhere in substances alone.
The qualification 'sure to inhere in eternal substances al>ne'
serves to exclude Intellect, Souud and the rest; as these are not
such as must exist in eternal substances alone; specially as
they do not pervade over all eternal substances.
Question.—" Are these Individualities pure and simple, or
are they both Individualities and Generalities, like 'Substance'
and the rest ? "

32

?RA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. I. SECTION* (1)-

In answer to this we have the next sentence—In as inuch
as <&c.—Kkula — 'certainly' ; The sense of this is that these
Individualities «hat inhere in eternal substances are always 'Individualities,'and do not ever become Generalities; and the
reason for tbis is that the only purpose that they ever serve
is the exclusion of their own substrates from other things. How
this is will be explained later on.
(1) Vt'qeska, Individuality, has got to be postulated as a distinct category as without sitine such category there would W« nothing whereby we could distinguish one
aton» from «mother, or such individual substations as Tiuie^. Space ami Altana trom » ne
another. It thus serves the purpose of differentiating one individual substance from
another, and also distinguishing itself from all other ihings. Thus "Viqisha " canuob
be translated as 'differentia'; because while the latter can reside in many substances
also, the former can beluug tu Individual subdtaacea aloue.
(2) The postulating of ehe Vi^esha forms a distinguishing feature of the Vaiqetthika
philosophy, from which the latter derive? its name. This theory obviate* the
necessity of assuming a- self-differentiating faculty for each individual substance by
providing a conmiou name fi>r ail such ultimate ' differentia.'
(For further discussion, see the section at the end of the book).
Text (9) : Inherence is the relaionxkip subsisting
among things that are inseparable, standing to
one another in the character of the container and,
the contained,—such relationship being the basis
of the idea that 'this is in that*
Commentary.
The author proceeds to explain the nature of Inherence.
'Yutasiddi* is separate existence, the existence of two relative
things apart from each other ; those that have no such separate existence are ' ayutasiddhas'; and it is the relationship
of these that is known as 'Inherence \ e.g. the relationship
betweeu the Cloth and the Yarns composing it; though the
Yarns have an independent existence of their own, apart from
the Cloth (Jit. inhere in substrates other than the Cloth), yet the
mutual relationship between the Yarn and the Cloth is such
that they do not bear the relationship of the container and the
contained to anything else (i. e. have no existence apart from
each other). It is only when the two factors are so related that
each bears to the other the relationship of the container and the

ENUMERATION AND CLASSIFICATION OF CATEGORIES.

33

contained to something other than the other factor, that we have
what is known as 'yutasiddhi; $. g. the relationship between
the organ of Touch and the Body, where we fiud that the Body
has an existence in its other parts, apart from the organ of
Touch. Consequently the relationship in this latter case, would
be one of Conjunction, and not of Inherence.
In the case of two eternal substances, * yutasiddhi' would
mean separate existence, the capability of moving or going
separately ; and those that are devoid of this capability would
be 'ayutasidda' ; and the relationship of these would be what is
known as Inherence*/ e. g. the relationship between Äkära, and
the general character of 'Substance/
If Inherence were defined merely as the relationship subsisting between two things that are incapable of separate existence, then the relationship between Virtue and Pleasure—
which is one of- cause and effect,—would also become 'Inherence';
as neither of the two has any existence apart from the self
wherein both of them inhere. Hence with a view to exclude
this, the Text adds—'standing to one another in the character
of the container and the contained1',—which is not added ( as
some people have supposed) for the purpose of excluding the
relationship of Älcäga and the flying bird; as the latter is
excluded by the expression of 'Äyutasiddhi* (the Akaca having
an existence independently of the bird).
la the same manner, the relationship between Älcäga, and
the word 'ÄJcäga*—which is one of the denoter and the denoted—
would be mistaken as 'Inherence'; hence with a view to exclude
this, the Author adds : 'the basis of the idea ofthat this is in that*
In the case of the relationship of the denoter and the denoted, the
idea that we have is that this word expresses 8uch and such a
meaning, and not that it is in this.
In as much as the two qualifications, 'Ädhärädhäryabhütänäm' and 'ihapvatyayaheluh' could not exclude the relationship

34

PRAQASTAP&DA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. II. SECTION (1).

between the pit aad the fruit fallen in it,—the author has
added 'ayutasiddhanam.'
Some people put forth two alternative explanations of the
word 'ayutasiddhi (in order to show that its use is not admissible) ; what they say is tbis: "Does the word mean that the
\two things are not recognised as joined together, or that they
are recognised as not joined together (but one and the same) ?
In the former case, what could be their relationship, they themselves being not recognised? and in the latter also, what could
the relationship be, when they would not be distinct from each
other ? As it is only when two objects are distinct that they are
related, e. g. in the case of the fruit and the pit wherein it
falls."
Others do not accept this; and this is what they say :
'Ucutam na siddhan * does not mean that they are not fully
accomplished objects ; because we do not admit of any Inherence
between nonentities. Nor does the compound mean 'recognised
as not joined together;' as if the two things were identical, there
would be one object only, and not two; as duality consists in
the negation of identity between two things. In the case of
Inherence, the two things are not one in reality; as their
forms are always recognised as distinct from each other ; and
"Difference' only consists in the cognisability by two distinct
ideas ; otherwise there would be no proper differentiation between Difference and Noa-differeace- Consequently ' Ayutasiddhi cannot mean 'ideutity.'
What the word 'ayutasiddhänärn' actually means is those
that have no substratrum apart from the other correlative.
In this case there would be no discrepancy in $he relationship ;
as there would always be a certain difference in the forms of the
two objects; and as between two distinct objects—e. g. in the
ca3e of fire and the ball of iron—no mutual contact would be
possible, without some sort of a relationship. The only difference
however between ordinary relationship and Inherence is this :

ENUMERATION AND CLASSIFICATION OF CATEGORIES.

35

It is after it is produced that the 6re becomes related to the
bail of iron; while in the case of Inherence, it is during the
process'of production that one thing becomes related to the other
by the peculiar nature of the potency of ics cause ; e. g. in the
case of the act-inn of cutting and the object cut We cut short
this discussion here.
Question :—" How is it that only six catagorie* are mentioned, and not others V*
Answer :~Simply because it is only these six that exist,
and no others—this non-exitence being ascertained from the fact
of their not being knowa hy any of the means of knowledge
exactly like the horns of a hare.
Thu3 then the general definition applying to the six
categories is the capability of being predicated ; and the following are the specific definitions of each of them : (I) Subsfcaace
w the substrate of Qualities; (2) Quality is that which has a
general character, is devoid of qualities, and which never appears as the independent cause of conjunction or disjunction ;
(3) Aetiou is that which resides in one substance, is devoid of
qualities, and which is the independent cause of Conjunction
and Disjunction; (4) Generality is that which serves as the
basis of inclusive cognition; (5) Individuality is the basis of
absolute differeoti&tion (or exclusion); and (6) Inherence is the
relationship of the container and the contained subsisting between two things that have no existence apart from one another.

(1) The relationship of the container and the contained must be natural arid
not adventitious
says tue Kiwnävalt.
(2) M Samavaya etymologically means the act of coming together clodeljr,
and is therefore used to denote a kind of ' intimate union ' between two things
which.are rendered inseparable". But ai the word * union ' conveys th*» idea of
conjunction, and not of iuaeparability, it has beeu thought fit to use the word
' Inherence ' for ' Samara y a', specially M this word and its cognates Are found
convenient in places where the word ' Samavita. or * Samaväya ' occur iu compounds.
(3) The word ' Ayutasiddka' means that which it known {siddha) as not separate {a-yuta)—the word ' yuta ' being derived from the root * yu * to separate.
(4) Though Kanada ( Sutra VII.—ii- 26 ) has defined Samaväya na that re-

36

PRAQASTAPÄDA BRÄSHYA-CHAP. II. SECTION (1).

lationsbip between the cause ami its effects, whereby the one is eoguised as residing in the other,—yet later writers have developed the theory to a great extent,
applying the name to the followingfiverelationships : (a) That between the whole
and its parts ; (b) between the quality and the substance it qualifies, (c) the
iBotioc and the moving; {d) the individual and the class to which it belongs ; (e) the
Individuality and the eternal substance wherein it resides.
(5) Samaväya is regarded as eternal and non-producible in order to guard against
the regressusad inßnitwn that would be caused by admitting its productibility
which would necessitate the assumption of an endless series of Samaväya upon
Samaväya.
(6) The doctrine, of Samaväya is very important and may in one sense be said
to be the eorner-aton© of the Nyäya Philosophy. It is the Samaväya that explains
the phenomenon of causality as conceived by the Naiyäyikas ; and it is this theory
that makes them so intensely realistic in marked opposition to idealistic schools like
the " Veddnta " (Athalye).
The Bhätta-Mimansakas, the Vedantis and the Sänkhyas are all opposed to the
Sanaa väya-theory. £ankaräcärya in his Bhäshyaou the Brahmaputras II.—ii.—23
in course of his refutation of the atomic theory of the Vai^eshika which is a
necessary corrollary to the Samaväya theory, has found in this the weakest point of
the theory and has very strongly put forward the reasoning that there can be no
finality in the theory, as it would always be uecessary to assume a relationship
whereby the Samaväya would reside in the Samaväyi, the thing related in the
Samaväya relationship. The Vedanti admits of no uuion except that of Sanyoga,
Conjunction, and the relationship between the cause and effect they hold to be one
of identity, Kumärila has dealt with the theory briefly in his Qlobn- Vartilca
(Trans, p. Öi); and in one of the Karikas he says—" If Samaväya is something
different from the class and the individual (that resides in the class by Samaväya),
then it (that Samaväya) could not exist in them as a relation ; on the other hand
if it be identical with them, then these two would be identical—by the law that
things that are identical to the same thing are identical to themselves."
Text (10): So far we have mentioned the objects without
sayinganything aa to their properties.
Commentary.
In as much as a treatment of the properties could not
be commenced before the objects themselves had been described
the Author now proceeds to explain the properties ; and with a
view to this, he shows the connection of what has gone before
The sense is that in the foregoing portion of the work, we have
simply mentioned by name, the objects, without saying anything
as to their properties; and it is these latter that we are going
to speak of now.
Though Substance and the rest have had their several
subdivisions mentioned, yet, icras much as these too have been
mentioned merely by name, these also become included in the
" mere meution."

SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARTIES AMONG CATEGORIES. 37
The A't'rav/avail aays that fbe text is in answer to the objection as to why
ouiy HO many c>itog-»rio.s Iiavo been mentioned, no mention having been made of
mich others'as ' Potency,' ' Similarity ' ;iud the like ;' the sense of the text being
that it in only the objects that have been mentioned ; while ' Potency, and the
veat are mere properties.
CHAPTER. III.
Similarities and Dissimilarities among CategoriesText (11) To all the six categories belong the properties of
being-ness, predicability, and cognisability.
CommentaryThough the properties are nothing beyond the six categor' ies, and it is these themselves that become objects and properties
with reference to another,—yet, in order to show the categories
iu the character of objects, that the text refers to tnem as ' to all
the six categories/'
' Being-ness '—i. e. the property o( existing in a particular
form—is common to all the six categories ; as it is the natural
form of an object that constitutes its ' being,'
c

Predicability'—capablity of being predicated oc spoken of
also is a form of the thing itself; as it is only the positive form
of an object that, under certain ciccumstaaces, is known as
1
cogoisability,' and under others as 'predicability.'

Astitva—Beingneea—consists in the fact of the thing being an object of positive cognition, that ia to say, in its capability of being perceived independently of
any counter-entity.
Predicability—is the capablity of being expressed in words. ' Cognisability'—
capablity of being known.
Though the last two belong to negations also, yet all that is meant here is that
these belong to the six categories, and not that they do not exist anywhere else.
(Kiranavali).
Though * beingness ' would seem to belong to Abhäva also, and as such the
mention of 'six' categories only would appear incorrect,—yet when we bear in
uiiud the fact that our author has enumerated only six categories, the incongruity
ceases ; as to mention * six ' categories, as having ' beingness' is as much as to say
that it belongs no all things. And any thing that exists is also capable of being
' predicated.'

38

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. U. SECTION (1).

Text (12): The character of being dependent (upon some
thing else) belongs to all things except the eternal
substances.
CommentaryBy* äcritalva'—being dependent—is meant the fact of
the thing being always perceived as depending upou something
else ; and this * depet.dence' is not of the character of * inherence.' (That is to say it does not mean that the tliiug is always
found to be inhering in something else); because as a matter
of fact this character of 'acritatva' does not belong to Inherence.
-" Except the eternal substances"—That is to say the character does not belong to the four kinds of atoms, or to Akdca,
Time, Space, Self and Mind.
There are certain people who hold that properties are something absolutely distinct from the objects in which they inhere.
For-these people, after they biave oace postulated the property
of ' Aatitva' (existence) as the one basis of the single notion
of ' being ' including ail things in the world, it would be alsolutely
useless to spoak of ' satta ' (Being) as the common property of
Substance, Quality and Action alone fas is done below).
As it is not these three alone that have existence, and
existence, as a property, is held by these people to be as distinct
from these three ts from any thing else,—Samaväya f. i.—and
the ' astitva' having afforded the necessary comprehensive notion,—there would be nothing left for which sattd could be postulated. If the 'astitwa' should be distinct with each individual
then, there would be no necessity of postulating any such allcomprehensive form as * astitva '; as the idea of * existence '
(that a certain thing ' is') could be got at from ' satta ' (being),
and also from the particular 'satta' (of each individual thing).
For those however, who bold ' astitva' to consist in a particular form of a positive entity* satta would not be useless; as
nn particular form could ever afford any comprehensive notion
of all existing things. Nor would it be unnecessary to postulate

SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES AMONG CATEGORIES. 39
'astitva'; as aattd could not inhere in anything devoid of a
positive form (and it is this positive form that is ' astUva). And
thus io accordance with this view both 'sattd' and (astitva '
are found necessary.
Saroaväya ia a particular form of relationship ; and as anch being an abstract
entity, is one only : and hence it can have no plurality. Nor does it reside in any
thing by the relation of inherence. A* auy auch residence would involve the
postulating of endless " Inherences."
Text (13): To the five, Substance and the rest, belong the
characters of inherability and plurality.
Commentary.
The author now points out the simlarity among Substance,
Quality, Action, Commuaity, or Generality and Individuality.
u
Inher ability" i. e. existence in a thing by the relation of
inherence.
" Plurality"—the character of being distinct from one
another,—that is to say, haviug forms differentiating th^tn from
one another.
If the Author had said merely 'of Substance and the rest
it would have included Inherence also; hence he restricts the
number to 'Hue.' If he had said only ' five,1 it would not be clear
what particular categories were meaut, hence he specifies them
as 'substance and the rest*
That which would be dependent upon some thing else would uot be eternal ;
as to be eternal a thiug must be self-aufficieut. Hence the character of being
dependent upon something else would be common only to noneternal Substances.
Text {IIf): To thtfive, Quality and the rest, also belong the
character of being devoid of qualities, and that of being without action.
Commentary.
The author now poiuts out the points of simlarity among
Quality, Action, Community, Individuality and Inherence.
" Being devoid of qualities "—L e. being qualified l>y an
absence of qualities.

40

PRACASTAPADA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. III. SECTION (1).
<c

Being without action " i. e. being qualified by an absence
of action.
(As to how absence, a negative entity, can be a qualification
of a positive entity) a negative entity can serve as the qualification of a positive entity, simply on account of its bringing about
a qualified cognition, exactly in the same way as a positive
entity can qualify a, negative one ; e. g. we have such an idea
as' aghatam bhütalam' [the 'jar-less place/ where * jarlessness,
a negative entity, qualifies the positive entity 'place'.]
Question: " As there is no relationship between a positive
and a negative entity, how could a negative entity serve as the
qualification ?"

Answer: There is no doubt that we have such a qualified
cognition (as ' aghatam bkütalam'); and on the strength of
this notion we could assume the necessary relationship, if you
consider it absolutely necessary for the qualification to be related
to the qualified.
According to the Vaiqeshikas, a quality can reside in Substances only. At
first sight it appears difficult to see the correctness of this notion ; as we often
make use of such expressions as 'bright colours,' 'pleasant taste' &c. where qualifications of brightness and pleasantness are found to bespoken of with reference to Colour
and Taste, which are qualities. But what the Vaiceshika will say is that the
lightness or pleasantness has for its substrate, the bright-coloured Substance, and«
notfch«colour.
By ' Action' here is meant chiefly motion ; and there can be no motion apart
from a Substance.
Text (IS) : To the three, Substance and the rest, belong the
relationship loith Being, the character of having Communities
and Individualities, that of being denoted by the word ' artha1
as a technicality of the Vaigeshika system, and that of being
the cause of virtue and vice.
Commentary.
The three, Substance, Quality and Action, are related to the
class ' Being,' by the relationship of Inherence (i. e. the three
inhere in that class); and this constitutes one point of simlarity
among them. As to how these are related to Being, we have

SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES AMONG CATEGORIES. 41
already explained that under Text "I. What we have got to
deal with here is the following. —
Question: " Is the relationship with Being with something
that is, or with that which is not ? If the former, then,-in as
much as this thing will already have an existence (a, being) before the relationship of ' Being/ there would be no use for this
latter; while in the other case, the thing being non-existing we
could have Being even in such non-existing things as the
fare's horo."
The reply to this is that in the case of eternal things we
do not admit of any precedence or sequence (and hence there can
be no such specification as ' before or after the relationship of
Being with regard to eternal objects; while in the case of noneternal (transitory) things, it is actually the previous non-existence that serves as the (instigative) cause of the being (or coming into existence of that thing) [i. e. it i9 only what does not
exist at all that can be brought into existence].
Nor could this apply to the ca3e of such absolute non-entities as the 'hare's horn' and the like; as we do not know of anything having the power of bringing into existence any such thing
(so in the case of these the previous non-existence could have
no causal efficiency).
There is another point of similarity among Substance,
Quality and Action; It is the character of having communities
and individualities: In as much as the generic classes ofsubstance and the rest serve as the basis of inclusive (or comprehensive ) as well as of exclusive cognitions, they are spoken of as
* Communities' and 'Individualities;' and it is to these three
classes of 'Substance,' 'Quality' and 'Action' that belong the
three categories of Substance, Quality and Action.
The character of being denoted by the tvord ' artha' an a
technicality of the Vaigeshika system. The doctors of the
Vaic^esbika system have a conventional technicality among
themselves, that the word ' artha ' should be taken as

42

PRACASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA -CHAP. III. SECTION (1).

ddaoting Ba-bscaaca, Quality aud Action; and it is tot this
reason that these three are also spoken of by means of the word
' artha' without any prefix or affix.
The character of being the cause of Virtue and Vice. These
throe «rethe causes that bring.about virtue and vice. For instance, earth ( Land which is a substance ) when given away
becomes th« source of virtue, while when taken away (forcibly)
gives rise to vice; similarly Conjunction or Contact (which is a
Quality) is a source of virtue (or purity) when appearing in
connection with the cow, aud a source of vice (or impurity) when
happening in connection with dead human bones; so again
'going' (which ia an' Action) is a source of virtue (purity) when
it ia towards a sacred place, and a source of impurity, when
tending towards a grogshop. Other similar instances may be
cited. In the expression Dharmadharmakat trtvam * the affix
' tva * indicates that substanct-a have an inherent faculty in
themselves, of producing Virtue and Vic«.
It might be argued that in this way ' class' ( which is
Sidmanya ) also could be shown as the cause of vritue and vice.
But the function of a class is restricted to the differentiation
of its substratum from those of other classe ; and its existence
being fully justified by this, we do not refer any other to it.
For the distinction made between ' Astitva,'. ' Sattatumbandha' and ' Svätmch
idttva.'—see note under Text (19).
( Text 16i):—The. character of being an effect and that
&f being non-eternal, belong only to those ( Sub#tances> Qulitiea and Actions) that have causes.
CommentaryThose things that have a productive cause,—such for instance
as Substance and the rest—have the common character of being
an effect and being non-eternal.
Some people have defined 'being an efteoV as inherence in the
cause or inherence in 4Being* prior to non-existence. But none

SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES AMOtfG CATEGORIES. 43
to these is correct; as of none of tliese would apply to ' Destruction ' which is as good an effect as anything else. Hence we
must define the charaoter of effect as consisting in the fact of
its having its existence (manifestation or appearance) dependent
upon the action of a cause : as this is the definition that ia fouad
to apply to all effects.
4
Non-etevnality* has been defined by some as existence
qualified by previous non-existence and subsequent destruction.
But this is not correct; for the simple reason that ' non-eternality' is never known in this form ; in ordiriary parlance what
people understand by * non-eternal' is destructible ; and they do
not understand it as qualified by any sort of existence.
Others again define it as liability to production and destruction, But there is not much in this definition either, as Prdgabhäva (Previous non-existence, which is non-eternal) is never
produced.
For theBe reasons we must accept non-eternality to consist of the destruction of the particular form of the thing; as has
been declared elsewhere—" Non-eternaiity is said to to the action of destruction in general." Though there is no destruction
at the time that the thiüg is actually existing, yet (there could
be nothing objectionable in having destruction as its qualification, as ) we do admit of destruction as the qualification of a
thing, when its possibility is proved by other means of knowledge
than direct perception (even though it may be not actually
perceptible at the time). And as a matter of fact we do find one
and the same man cognising the jar (an entity) as non-eternal;
similarly also, such notions as—'the destructible body/ 'the unpermanent objects'—are very common. [ In all these cases the
object itself is what is directly perceived, the qualification being
always recognised by other means of knowledge.]
Text (17) :~Tke quality of being the cause belongs to all
(Substances, Qualities and Actions) eticept the 'atomic
measure' &c.

44

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA 3HÄ3HYA-CHAP. III. SECTION (1).

Commentary.
The etcetera includes—(1) the dimension of the diad, (2)
the omnipresence of Alcaga, Time, Spice and Self, (3) the 'final*
sound, (4) the dimension of the mind, (5) Posteriority and
Priority, (6) Dual Sepatateness, and (7) Dimension of the ultimate bodied substance. Barring these, to all Substances,
Qualities and Action, belongs the character of the cause material
and non-material.
Though Substance is never the non-material cause, and
Qualities and Actions never appear as material causes,—yet
the similarity spoken of consists in the fact of these appearing
as causes other than the Instrumental*
NOTES :—Under c Parimändalya.' the Kira^dvali includes the following :—
(1) The Largest Dimensiou, (2) The colour, T*afce, Odour, Touch and Dimension, of the ultimate bodied substance, (3) Dual separateneas, (4) Distance, (5f$
Proximity, (6) The Conjunction, Disjunction, Speed and Action of substances in
the state of destruction, i.7; The Final sound, (8) The Final Faculty, or potency.
Parimäv<u , Dimensions have the nature of causing or bringing about a part'
mina or dimension of a degree higher than themselves ; and it is for this rtaton
that no ultimate Parimazcu caa ever be causes.
Cause.—That is the cause, on the existence of which something elae exists,
and on the non-exi9tence of which this latter does not exist. (Nyäyavärtika p. 24.)
Causes are of two kinds—Principal and Secondary. To the former kind belong
the three classes of cause—viz. (1) the Samaväyi or material cause, as the atoms
of the universe, (2) the asamavayi, or non-material cause, t. g> the conjunction of
the atom», and (3) the nimitta or Instrumental cause, t. g. God's wish to create.
This according to the Naiyäyika and the Vaiceshiha*
The Vedäcti admits of only two kinds of cause—{)) the nimitta, e.g. Brahma
of the universe ; (2) the upädäna or material cause e. w the atoms directly,' and
Brahma indirectly. According to the SSnkbyas, Prakrti is both the nimitta and the
upädäna kdrana of the universe. It may be remarked in passing that the nimittakärana includes the 'efficient' 'Formal' and 'final' cause of Aristotle, as the
Upädäna or Samavdyi Kdrana includet his 'material' cause.
Text (18) :• The character of subsisting in substances ( belongs to Sulstaaees, Qualities and Actions ) with
the exception.of Ike eternal substances.
Commentary.
Question.—" It has been said- before that dependence belongs to the six (categories); and as such the present sentence
vrould appear to be a useless repetition."
In answer to this some people explain that what is spoken of

SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES AMONG CATEGORIES. 45
here is dependence on, or subsistence in, substances. But this
explanatioa is not satisfactory; as such existence in substances
would belong to Generality and the rest also ; and hence the sentence in question could not be rightly taken as showing a point
of similarity between Substance, Quality and Action only.
Hence we must explain the sentence in the following
manner : Tn the clause ' anyatra nityadravyebhyah'', the word
'dravya* should be taken as including also the ultimate Individualities of these ; the sense of the sentence thus comes to be this':
the character of subsisting in Substances alone is common to the
three (Substance, Quality and Action), with the exception of the
eternal substances and the Individualities of these.
NOTES :—The 'Subsistence' here spoken of indicates that these have Substanc«
for their inherent or material cause. And the- meaning is that this is a character
that is common to all substances, qualities *nd actions, ezcept those substances
and qualities that a»e eternal. The presence of 'ea* in the Text indicates another
common character, which consists of their having qualities for their non-material
causes ; this character also is common to all substances, qualities and actions,
except those that are eternal, and Also the first conjunction and disjunction.
Kiramtvall.

19: The three beginning with Generality have the
character—of having their nole being within them*
selves, having Buddhi or the Cognitive Faculty as
their sole indicator tofnot being aneffect, ofnotbeing
the cause, of having no particular generalities, of
being eternal, and of not being expressible by th*
word 'artha.' (I—ii—10,12,14,16,3; VII—ii—-26).
Commentary.
The existence of Generality, Individuality and Inherence,
lies in their own individual specific forms, and not in any relationship to any such generic entity as 'Being/ What is meant
by this is that these three categories have the common character
of being devoid of any generalities. This is accepted because
of the absence of any notions to the contrary. Nor can there
be any such Generality as ' Being ' in Generality itself, as the
consequences of such a postulate would be very undesirable (as
the presence of a Generality in Generality would leadfc>an un-

46

PRA£ASTAPADA BHÄ8HYA—CHAP. III. SECTION (1).

necessary regressus ad infinitwm, an endless series of Generalities.)
In the case of Individualities (Ultimate Individualities) also,
if we had any Generality applying to them, in as much as there
would always be a doubt as to the particular Generality to which
a number of Individualities with similar properties would belong,
it would be necessary to follow up the series of Individualities,
step by step; and this would lead us to an endless series of
these individualities.
So also in the case of Inherence, if we accepted any such
Generality as * Being' applying to it, we would have to postulate another relation of inherence by which the Inherence would
be related to that Being ; and so on and on it would be necessary to postulate Inherences ad infinitum, which would be
far from desirable.
In the case of the „classes ' Gotva' and the like, the connection of'Being' naturally ceases, on the cessation of the connection
of these classes with any sub-classes under them ; as any connection with 'Being* would only form part of a connection with
these sub-classes.
Question : " If what is said above is true, then, how is it
that with regard to Generality &c, we have the notions of
' Being ' (satta) [ i. e. How do you account for the notion that
tfte Generality eodatd ? ]"
Answer : This notion is due to the fact of aattd ('Being)
beiug imposed upon them, through their common character of
having their existence in themselves.
" Well, in that case, the imposition would be a false one.'1
Certainly; who says it is not BO 1 Any notion of singleness
with regard to a number of distinct things cannot but be false.
What is not false, is the perception of the form of the thing ;
as this is always real.
" In that case, even in the case of Substance &c. we
might take the inclusive generic notions of singleness as being
due to an unreal imposition of Being"

SIMILAIUTIBS AND DISSIMILARITIES AMONG CATEGORIES. 47
That «annot be; as we cannot accept a thing to be indirectly
imposed, when we find it applying directly ; nor can this connection with c Being1 be said to apply directly to the case of
Generality &c. (and indirectly to the case of Substance); as we
have distinct notions to the contrary precluding such a connection ; while there are no such preclusive notions in the case of
Substance &c.
Raving Buddhi as their sole indicator: i. e. their only
proof lies in the Intellect; that is to say in a matter of dispute
as to whether or not Generality &c. exist, our only criterion lies
in the Intellect; whereas for the existence of Substance and
the rest, we would have other grounds for our belief—in the
shape of tlie effects brought about by these, for instance.
Some people explain ' buddhilakshana' as that these are
cogniaed by means of Buddhi alone. But this is not right; as
Substance and the rest are also cognised by means of Buddhi';
and as such this could not be a point of dissimilarity between
Generality &c. on the one band and Substance and the rest on
the other.
Not being an effect—i. e. having an existence independently of any causes. This character, in the case of Generality,
is recognised, like invariable concomittance, by means of senseperception itself,—which perceives the existence of that Generality, before, after and also duriug the continuance of the Individual,—which is also found to help in the non-perception of any
cause,— and which is aided by a faculty or tendency of the
mind brought about by the frequent perception of the said facts.
Inherence also is recognised as a non-effect, because with
regard to it we have no notions as to ite appearing before, or
after, or along with ( the thing related to it). If the Inherence
of the cloth were possible before the, cloth, then, in a$ much as
one member of the relationship ( viz. the cloth ) would not be
existing at the time, wherein could the relationship {viz. Inherence) abide ? If it were to be produced afcoag with the cloth,
then, in that case, the cloth would lose the character of being

48

PRA<?A9TAPÄDA BHÄ8HYA— CHAP. III. OECTION (1).

the substrate of that relationship (of Inherence). If it appeared
after the cloth, then too the cloth would not be its substrate.
Nor would it do for the effect (Inherence) to be without a substrate. For these reasons, it must be admitted that Inherence is
not caused. As for the Individualities, their non-causedness
is proved by the argument that they are uncaused, because they
are entities other than Substances, Qualities and Actions,—like
Generality and Inherence.
Not being the cause : i.e. they never appear as either material
or non-material causes. This negation does not apply to the
Instrumental cause, as Generality &c. are accepted to be the
Instrumental causes of Buddhi (Cognition).
Having no particular Generalities i. e. having no Subclasses. There is no further Generality in the case of Generality
itself; as the acceptance of any such would lead to an endless
number of Generalities. Then as for Individuality and Inherence, we have already shown how there can be no generalities
of these.
Question : " In that case how is it that we have the single
inclusive notion of 'Generality/ applying to aU Generalities ?"
Answer : This notion is due to the fact of the inherence,
in one Generality, of many individuals,—a fact which is quite
extraneous to the real character of a Generality.
The use too of the word 'one' with reference to Individualities
is due to the possibility of every thing being capable of giving
rise to notions of exclusion.
•Etcrnality.—Indestructibility. This too, in the case of
Generality is ascertained, like invariable concomittance, by pure
sense-perception, which is found to function frequently with
regard to the presence of the generality among a number of
appearing and disappearing individual things. As for Inherence, j
its efcernality is inferred from the presence of its effects everywhere, and also from the fact of its being uncaused.
Not being expressible by the word 'artka*—i.e. by the
word as used technically in the Vaigfckika system.

»iiiTLARITISS AND DISSIMILARITIES AMONO CATEGORIES. 49

K0TX8 :—" Buddhilakthanatva"—The 'buddhf here meant are the notion» of
exclusion and inclusion. Kifandvali.
It will be noted that the author tnakes a distinction between 'AstUva,'
'Sattöxxmbandha and * Svätmasatlva: He ?ays that '.Otifva' Wongs to all the »ix
calories ( Text. 2) ; 'SattätambandAa' to Substance, Quality and Action only
[Text. 15); and 'Svatmatattpa' to Generality, Individuality and Inherence. The
differeuoe ia not very «any of comprehension. Udayanacärya in his Riranävali
«ay« that, (1) 'Astitva' con««te in the capability of being cognised aa a positive entity
by iUeif,—not being dependent upon the cognition of the counter-entity j for
instance, a negative entity, the absence of the jar, can only be cognised aa the
negative of the jar ; (2} 'Sattasambandha consists in the subsistence of 'being* by
tho relation of inherence ; and (3) 'Swtmaaattva Is existence by itself, self-sufficient
existence, not dependent upon the subsistence of 'Being.'
This dintiaction appears to be merely verbal. Qankara Micra is a little more
clear, in his Upankdra : 'ScUtätambandha' be explains as destroctibility, capability
of producing products out of its own material, producibility. From this it would
Mem that—(1) 'Attitva' is what we m«an by 'existence* ia general—this naturally
belongs to all the six categories ; (2) 'Sattdtambandha' ia thai existence which ts
due to the presence of the Generality of 'being,' induced by some other cause,
and liable to destruction,—this by its very nature can belong to only such of the
oategorie* as are transient; and these a» we know are Substance, Quality and
Action; (S) ' Svdtmasattva ' is self-sufficient existence, independent of all other
things,—and this can belong only to the eternal categories.
Tent (20) All the nine, Earth,and th& rest, have the character of— (1) belonging to the class 'Substance' ( 2 )
self-productiveness or bringing about effects in
themselves, (3) having qualities, (4) being not
destructible by their causes and effects, and (5)
being connected with ultimate Individualities.
(I-i-9, 10, 12, 15, 18, 5; X-ii-1, 2.)
Commentary.
The auther now proceeds to point out the points of similarity among the substances.
It is Earth &c. alone that have a connection with the generic
class 'Substance.' The particle c<ipi shows that all the nine
Substances have this character. This qualification also serves
aa the character differentiating the category of Substance from
the other categories, and it also shows the actual denotation of
the word 'Substance/
Objection: " 'Dravyatvayoga (Connection with the class
'substance') means 'inherence in the class snbstxnce'; and in as
much as this inherence belongs to ail the five categories (of
Substance, Quality, Action, Generality and Individuality), how
could it serve as the differentia of Substances alone ? "

50

?BA£ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. III. SECTION (1)

To this, some people make the following reply: Tbougb
Inherence in all places, is one and the same, yet in as much as
la the case in question, it is qualified hy the class *substance,
it serves as the differentia of Substance^ As for instance, we
find that in the case of Äkäca, which is one and all pervading,
different functions are attributed to it, as conditioned by the
limitations of the Ear and she like,
Sut both the question and the reply given are equally unsatisfactory. The 'connection* (of* the class Substance) is not
the differentia of Substance, in the-sameway as Äkäca is of the
Ear; in fact it is the class 'Substance* (Dravyatva) which is the
differentia ; and the word * yoga * (connection) has been added
simply because the class, when unconnected, could not serve as
the differentia; and all that is meant by this is that the existence
( or presence ) of the character ('substance') in the object
( substance ) is poiated out. Thus then the differentiation
indicated would be thus expressed: 'The Earth and the rest
differ from other things, because they belong to the class
Substance,—those that do not differ from those things are
not found to belong to that class,—e. g. Colour etc. Hence
we conclude that both the objection and the reply are
equally untenable.
Page 2 1 ] The author points out another similarity among the
substances: Bringing, about effects within themselves—i. e. producing such effects as inhere in themselves.
Having Qualities—i. «. being related to qualities.
These last two characteristic are the points of dissimilarity
between Substance and Quality etc. as they are not found anywhere else except in substances.
Being not destructible by their causes and effects,—in the
case of Qualities we find that the first sound is destroyed by
the second sound ; sometimes it is destroyed by the cause
e. g. the last sound, by the last but one sound; Action too is
sometimes destioy^d by an effect,—e. g. (motion is destroyed) by

AäfD DISSIäfJLAElTISS AMOKG CATEGORIES. 5 1
a subsequent contact with something else ; Substances however
are not thus destroyed, either hy their cause or by their effect; and
hence they are spoken of as w>t\ destructible by their causes
and effects. As for the eternal substances, there is no sause ;
nor is there any destruction ; hence for these there naturally is
no destruction by the cause ; and as for the transient substance«,
though for these, both cause and destruction are possible, yet
their destruction is not by their cause, but by something altogether apart from themselves.
NOTE :—We may regard this Text a« supplying the Pracastap&da'a definition
of 'Substance.'
Not destructible by came» and effects—
la the casts of Qualities, of aonnd for in«tance, wefindthat when one sound
produce* another it is destroyed by this latter; and in the case of Action also
wefindtKat when it bring« about its effect in the shape of the contact of its substratum with another point in spaoe, it is destroyed by thia contact. Substance« on
the other hand are never destroyed by any of their effects or causes ; whenever they
are destroyed, their destruction is due to the destruction of their causes.—Kirandvail
prah&qa.
*Qunavattva'—Western philosophers have also defined ' Substance* as " the
existence to which qualities belong.' Aristotle defines it as the substratum. Says
Look«—"The idea to which we give the geueral name Subs',ance, being nothing but
the supposed and unknown sfepport of these qualities we find existing which we
imagine cannot subsist
without something to supporVJthem, we call that
support Subttantia. (Essay—IX-xxrii—2),
Berkeley denies the existence of &ny such support or substratum for qualities
which, being mere sensations, require no other support than the tnind that perceives
them. Kant admits the validity of this argument ; but while denying the notion
of Substance as the substratum of qualities, he regarded it to be necessary as a
category of thought, providing for the unity of the qualities themselves, he proves
its existence as one of those Categories without which no experience would be
possible.
The Scottish Philosophers reassert the dual Substance of Descartes, and bold
the existence of a Spiritual and Material Substance. The Vaiceehikas, rightly
regarding the Soul as a Substance—a substratum of qualities—appear to be the
originators of this dual conception of Substance,

Text (ßl) :—The character of not being dependent and
that of being eternal, belong to all (Substances)
except those that are made up of certain con8tituent parts.
Commentary.
'Not being dependent* is not inhering in anything.
' EternalUy* is ' Indestructibility.* These two are the points

52

?RA£AS?APÄDA SHÄSHYA—CHAP, III. SECTION <1).

of similarity among substaiices; but not among all substances )
as they belong to all ' except those that are made up of certain
constituent} parts. That is to say, barring such substances, al*
substances have the character of being endowed with ultimate
Individualities, of being independent, and of being eternal.
The implication of the particle ' ca' is that Earth etc.
have for their common characters, not only those pointed out in
the last text, but also the two mentioned in the present one.
Text (22):—To Earth, Water, Fire, Air, *8oul and Mind,
belongs the character of being many, and also
that of having lower or less extensive generalities.
Commentary.
The author shows the points of similarity aad * dissimilarity among the various Substances.
} Being many i. e. having many individuals, each distinct
by itself.
Having lower or less extensive generalities i. e. having sue
series of classes as 'Earth', C Jar') and so forth.
NOTE :—The Kiranävali remarks that another property common to these i«
the capability of having Sanikdra or faculty.

Text (23):— To Earth, Water, Fire, Air and Mind, belong
the character of having actions, being corporeal,
having distance and proximity, and having speed.
(V-ii-l to 7, to 14; V-l-17 ; VII-2 21.)
Commentary.
Action i. e. such actions a3 Throwing up and the like.
1 eing corporeal i. e. having limited dimensions.
Distance etc. i. e. Presence of Distance, Proximity and Speed
or Momentum.
Objection: "In as much as all ideas of Distance and
Proximity would be explained as following from the largeness
* Henceforth we shall translate the word ' ätmä ' by the word 'soul'; a« in the
sense of the fivätmä at any rate, 'aoul' ia more easily intelligible to Eagltah reader«
tlv.\n 'self/

SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES AMONG CATEGORIES.

53

oraoiailuess of the extent of the conjunction of connected
there can be no ground for postulating any such iudependent
qualities as 'Distance' and 'Proximity'."
Fagd 22-3 Rtpfy '—This cannot be ; because as a matter of fact,
we have uo idea of 'Distance' and ' Proximity,' even when, in
the case of two things connected with two separate directions,
there are comparative largeness and smailaess of the conjunction of connected things *, and even where there is an appearance
of the ideas of distance and proximity with reference to the
body of the looking person. (That is to say where the person is
in the middle and the two things on two sides of him.)
" But we have such a notion when the two things are on
one and the same side of the person."
True ; but even in that case, there is something over and
above the mere largeness and smallneas of the extent of conjunction; as until there be some such distinct object, no distinct and new idea would be possible,
Speed is a distinct quality, and not a mere series of actions,
as we have no idea of Speed in the case of slow motion (though
even in this latter case the series of actions remains just the
same).
It might be argued that the idea of Speed is based upon
the extremely quick appearances of the moments of action.
But it is not so; as in the case of the whirling fire-brand,
where the moments of motion are appearing and disappearing
very quickly, we have no perception of the moments of the
action ; and yet we have the notion of Speed. Even in ordinary
parlance we und people making a distinction between speed and
action; e. g.t we find people saying ' he goes with speed,'
NOTE :—The Siranävali takes 'action' to be the act of motion ($panda) ; and
'corporeality' to consist in the presence of limited extenatoaan.spttua. If this latter
explanation were not added, it would be difficult to see how water, air and mind
are corporeal. The mind is atomic, and as such of a limited extension in space. If
no motion belonged to mind, no perception would bo possible ; a^ in all acts of
perception, the mind moves up to the particular sense-organ copcerned.

54

$RA£ASTAPADA BHlsHfA-eSAP, III. SECTION (1).
Test (24):—To JCkäca, Time and Space; belong the characters of—being all-pervasive, having the largest
dimensions, and being the common receptacle of
all eo-rporeai iAin^«.—(VII-i-22, M, 25.)

Commentary.
The context shows that by ' all iu all-pervasive afe meant
all composite/ material? substances, mentioned above» Hence
4
all-pervasive' would mean that A'käca etc,, have connection
with all composite? material substances, and not that they 4 go*
everywhere; because these are devoid of all motion.
Largest dimensions1 i. e., they have dimensions that cannot be measured; i e., they are illimitable.
1
Being the common receptacle of all corporeal things/
that is tö say, Ahäca is the one receptacle or substratum of all
composite material substances.
t%e same explanation will apply to the case of Space and
the rest.
Though as a matter of fact Ähäcay etc., do not actually
appear aft the receptacl« of material things, yet, being the receptacle Offellconjunction, they »re figuratively spoken of as the
receptacle also of all conjunct (material, composite) things*
It is on this account that this qualification differs from * allpervasiveness'—which means that they have a connection with
dl thing* ; while what the last expression means is that they
are the rtcsptoek etc.
NOT« .-The Xiiaf&vall say« that 'ca' iadictt« th« »brae« of Action, DUfane«, Ptvtimity and Sp<td.

Text (25):—Tö Öte five beginning with Earth, belong
the character* of—being material, being the main
material prinoiffo of the aenne-organs, and being
endowed ifftih such spctiftd qualified as are each
hfik
external organ* of per5, 6).

SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES AMONG CATEGORIES. 35
Commentary.
'
The author now shows the points of similarity among
Earth, Water, Fire, Air and Akäca, with a view to difrereiitiaia i
them from the other substances.
"Being material"—i.e., being expressed by the word
bhiita' (' materiai substance'). This single word f bhüta* is
applied to these Earth etc., even in the absence of any common
ground for such denotation; just as the word *aksha' which
denotes a dice, the sense-organs, the bibhitaka fruit and many
other thing*, simply through the. general characters of these
things,—in the same manner the word * bhüta' is made by convention to apply to the Earth etc ,—such application be£*g
based upon the general characters of "Earth," "Water," etc;
as for Äkäca, which is one only, the application of the word is
based upon the individual alone ; and the denotability (of Äkäca)
by this word is due to certain limiting conditions (of verbal
convention); just as the idea of the word * aksha is with regard
to the dice and other things.
Page 23]. Be*ng the main material principle of the senseorgans : that is the Earth etc. form the main principles of the
particular organs of sense.
Objection :—" The sense-organs cannot be said to have the
material substances for their main principles; as these organs are
found to operate without getting afc the objects of perception,
while it is a characteristic of all material things that they can
operate upon an object only when they get at it, and not otherwise ; as we und in the case of the Lamp."
Reply:—This is not right; as the sense-organs do not
perceive things that are hidden from them (i. «., things lying
behind certain obstructions). If the sense-organs were operative without actually getting at the objects,—then they could
perceive things behind the wall also, as non-approach in this would
exactly be similar to that in the case of a, thing directly in
contact Tutb the organ.

56

PSA^ASTAPÄDA 3HÄSHYA-CHAP. III. SECTION (1).

Objection:—" The non-perception of the hidden object
may be saki GO be due to the absence of capability, either in
the aense-orgaa or in the object to be perceived."
Reply:—As for the sense-organ, its capability, in the shape
of an ability to perceive objects, is already present, as is shown
by the fact of its perceiving, at that very time, things that are
not hidden. Then as for the object, its capability consists in its
largeness, in its being made up of many constituent substances ;
and the presence in it of a particular form and colour, does not
cease to exist, on its being hidden; and as for-its being before
the sense-organ, this too remains the same, (even on the interception of the wall).
The following argument may be brought forward: '"'The
absence of obstruction forms one of the causes of tbe perception of an object; just as the absence of eonjuvation is in the
case of falling; and certainly when there is an obstruction (in
the shape of the wall\ the absence of obstruction would naturally cease to exist; and as such, the cause of perception being
wanting, there would be no perception."
But there is not much in this argument either, as an obstruction is found to retard the perception^ of only such things
as are perceptible to the touch. For instance, an umbrella is
found to retard or throw off only the falling drops of water or
the rays of the sun; and it does not merely remove its own
absence.
Thus then, we easily get at the following inference: The eye
illumines that which it g*ts at,—(I) because it does not illumine
that which is hidden, as we find in the case of the lamp; or (2)
because it is an external sense-organ,—like the organ of touch
Question—" In that case how is it that we have a perception of distant objects."
Anvw&r-~That perception is due to the proximity (or
contact) of the object with the rays of light. That is to say, the

SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES AMONG CATEGORIES. 57
rays oHight pro^edin^ from th^ eve, \vhich have no manifested
colour or touch, teach to a certain distance and ihere appreheud the object. Aod thus the sense-organ beiug found tobe
the illuminator of things large as well as small, why should
not they be accepted as material 1 specially as such illumination is quite possible by means of the rays (proceeding from
the eye) just as in the case of the lamp. The fact is that in a
case where many particles of the rays come in contact with the
object and its m-iny particles, we have a clear perception of the
object, because of the sense apprehending the object along
with all its peculiarities; on the other hand, in a case where the
rays come in contact only with certain parts of the object, the
perception is not quite clear, as what is apprehended in this case
is the object qualified only by it3 generic character.
Objection—"' That which moves (as you hold the rays to do)
is always fouud to get at things near and remote, gradually (i. e.
one after the other); how is it, then, that we have a perception,
at one and the same time, of the branch of a tree, and also
of the moon ?"
Reply—As a matter of fact, there is no actual similiarity?
in the perception of the tree and the moon *, the gradual stages
are not perceived on account of the extremely swift functioning
of the sense-organ; just in the same manner as we are not cognisant of any gradual stages of time in the piercing, by means
of a needle, of a huudred lotus leaves of the lotus flower; so the
notion ofsimult&neity in such cases must be regarded as a mistake.
Objection: —" If the sense-organs be held to get at the
objects, there could be no such perception as that this is separated or removed (at a distance).'1
Reply :—N"t so ; as this perception is capable of another
explanation. The relationship of the senses being imperceptible
by the senses, the ideas of separation or non-separation, cannot
be due to the presence or abse ce, of that relationship ; they
must be due to the preseuce or absence of the relationship of the

5S

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. III. SECTION (I).

body. Thus then, in a case where we have the perception of an
object that is in contact with the body, we have the idea that
the objeGt is not separated from (near) us; when however the
perceived object is not in contact with the body, wehave the
idea that it is separate (at a distance).
Page 24-3 Being endowed ivith etc., That is to say the E irth &c,
are endowed with such specific qualities, like Colour and the rest,
as are capable ot being perceived by each of the external senseorgans, the eye &c, In as much as these qualities are all
perceived by the internal organ (mind), they could not be spoken
of as perception by each one of the organs ; hence the word
'external' has been added (which excludes the internal organ),
The expression ' each one1 has been added with a view to describe the real forms of the qualities.
NOTE:—" Indriyapralrti" is explained by the Kiranävall as being the
materiafceause of the sense-organs.'
Text (26):—To the four belong the characters of—being the
material or component cause of substances, and of
being perceptible by touch.—(II—i—\ to 4>;
I—I—-23)
CommentaryEarth, Water, Fire and Air, have the property of being the
material or component cause of things; and this is a natural
capability ioherent ia these.
NOTE :—The Kirandtali points out other pimilar properties, in the shape
of—£1) the amenability to elasticity, (2) the capability oi producing the body and
the 3tn3eorgan8 &c. But the latter does not seem to differ from what we have in
the test, spoken of as 'dravyärambhakatä.'
Text (27) :—To the three, the characters of—-being perceptible by the senses, having colour, and having
fluidity.—(II—i—1, 2, 3, 6. 7).
Commentary.
The three, Earth, Water and Fire, have—the character
of being perceived by the means of cognition operating through

SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES AMONG CATEGORIES. $9
the sense-organ, This is what is meant by 'perceptible by the
senses,' which does not mean that they are endowed with such
causes of perceptibility as grossnes and the like; as in that.case
the mentioQ of 'colour' would be a useless repetition.
Objection:—" Peceptibility belongs to the Soul also (and
then why should only three be spoken of as as perceptible)" ?
Reply :—True ; but only three have been spoken of as perceptible ; as what is meant here is perceptibility by the external
organs of sense (while the Soul is perceived by the intern«! organ
only).
Text (28):—To the tioo, the character of hairing gravity
and taste.—(II—i—1, 2 ; V—i—7, 18 V^—ii—3).
Commentary.
The ' two' e. g. Earth and Water in as much as these alone
have gravity they are spoken of as * heavy/
The ' cd means that it is common to them, along with the
quality of having Taste.
Text (29):—All material substances and the Souls have
the character of having specific qualities.
Commentary.
The " material substances" i. e., Earth, Water, Fire, Air and
sfkdcci.
" Specific qualities' are thoss qualities, of colour&c, which
tend to specify or distinguish their substrates from other things.
Such qualities are present only in the five material substances
and in the Souls.
Page 25-] Text (30) -.—Earth, Water and the Souls have the
fourteen qualities.—(II—i—1, 2, 6; IV—i—11 ;
V—i—17, 18, 7 ; III—ii—4, 20, 21; II—ii—5, 2 ;
V—ii—1, 3 to 6, 8, 11; IX—ii—6 ; VII—i—2.)
Text (31):—Äkdca and the Souls have such specific
qualities as last only a single moment and exist
only over certain parts of their substrates.

(50

PKAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. III. SECTION (1).
COILHL eiA ar y.

la as much as specific qualities in general belong to Earth
&c, also, the author, with a view to preclude these, has added—
' such as exist only over certain parts of their .3/.'As trates! Then
again, these specific qualities are such as are quickly destroyed ;
and it is this character of these that is expressed by the word
' Kshanika1 (lasting only a single moment).
>
NOTE :—Have the fourteen qualities :—The similarity here meint is only one
in the number of qualities. If only njeans that the things spoken öf have only
fourteen qualities, and not that each of them has the same qualities ; that is to say
whatever the qualities may be, the number of these canuot be more or leas than
fourteen—1 KiU)
The specific quality of Akfya is sound, and tlut of Soul consists of Intellect,
Pleasure. Paiu, Desire &c. &c.

Text (32) :—Space and Time have the common character
of having five qualities, and that of being the
J instrumental caus^of all that has an origin.
(II—ii—8, 12,-9; II—i—31; VII -i—24, 25;
VII—ii—22)
Commentary.
To Space and Time belong the five qualities—Number, Dimension, Isolation or Separat^oess, Conjunction and Disjunction.
The similarity of these two does not rest on)y in the possession of these five properties ; another point of similarity consists in the fact of both of these being the instrumental cause
oi all such things as have an origin (i. e. all products).
Objection:—" How are we to believe that Time and Space
ane the instrumental cause of all caused things ? If this idea
be based simply on certain popular assertions (as that 'this
thing was produced in such ani such a place and at such and
such a time'), then this would be too wide a reason; as we
come across even such assertions as—' this was born at home,
aad that was born in the stalls'—where such things as * home '
&c, which cannot be the instrumental cause, are spoken of as
such/'

SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES AMONG CATEGORIES. Q\
Reply;—-As a matter of fact, we find the origination or
production of all things invariably restricted within particular
points of »pace and time, iu the same minner us the production
of the cloth is restricted within such causes as the thread and
the like ( while there is no such invariable relationship between
the birth and the home). If the peculiarities of Space and Time
were not operative towards the production of things, then
causes would bring about their effects, at any time and in any
place, at random.
Objection:—" The effect could not be so produced at random
because the cause would not be present at all places and times."
Reply:—It must then be admitted that effects are produced only at such time and place when and where the causes
exist, and not otherwise. And thus particular points of space
and time must he regarded as integral factors in the causes of
things; specially as all causes aie found to be dependent upon
the peculiarities of these, in the point of their due efficacy. And
all that we mean by saying that Space and Time are the
instrumental causes of things, is that while these latter are
produced in one place and at one time, they are not produced
at any other time or place.
NOTE : —IU a3 much as the 3oul aho is the instrumental cause of all thing*,
the common character here spoken ofha« beeu found to consist in the fact of Space
amlTiuie being such instrumental ciuse* as are the recepkicle (container) of all
things ;the soul, though the instrumental c.iu-e, is not the container.—{KiranuvalZ).

Text (S3):—Earth and Five are possessed of only such
Fluidity as is brought about by extraneous causes.
(II—i—6, 7.)
Commentary.
This declaration is based upon the fact that Butter, which
is of the nature of Earth, and GoKl, which is of the nature of
Fire, are found to melt under fire.
Objection :—"Such Fluidity may be heid to belong to the
Earth only; and that which is found to be present in the gold
set on fire, may be only that which inheres in something (the

62

PRAQASTAPÄDA BH'ASHYA—CHAP. III. SECTION..(1).

particles of Earth) present in (or connected with) the particles of
Fire (in the gold)."
Reply:—This cannot be ; as the Fluidity of earthy things is
found to disappear and to be burnt to ashes, on the application
of extreme heat; while such is not found to be the case with
the Fluidity of gold (which is found to remain as fluid as ever,
even on the application of greatest heat). It is this very
argument that sets aside the view held by some people that
Gold is of the nature of Earth; because if Gold were earthy,
then its iluidity would entirely disappear, on the application of
great heat, as is found to be the case with Butter and other such
earthy substances.
Another argument put forward in support of the earthy
nature of Goid is this: " Gold and other metals are of the
nature of Earth,—because while being devoid of natural
Fluidity, they are endowed with Gravity,—like a piece of
stone." But there is not much in this argument; because
it has still to bo ascertained whether the gravity that is perceived in the G )ld is a quality belonging to the Gold itself, or
it is due to the contact ( of the gold particles) With something
«ise (the earth-particles) to which that gravity belongs,—as
we find in the case of Butter, whose viscidity is due to the
element of water that is mixed up with the e irth-particles.
Another reason brought forward in support of the earthy
nature of gold is that—"it is illuminable by extraneous sources
of light (like a piece of stone) (while Fire is self-luminous)."
But this illuminability by extraneous sources of light may be
due to the fact of the gold having a colour that is not manifested ;
and as such ifc cannot prove its earthy nature. It is only a few
arguments that we have shown here in support of the fiery
nature of gold.
The author now proceeds to show that in the above manner,
other points of similarity among other things may be shown ;
and so also, by the contrary method, may be shown the points

SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES AMONG CATEGORIES. (j3
of dissimilarity with a view to differentiate one thing from
another.
Text (SJf.):—In this way we may describe the similarities
of all things, and contrarivjise, also their dissimilarities ; and thus there would he no intermixture (or confusion) among the various substances,
(I—i—13, 14; V—ii—21.)
Commentary.
So long as the things have n>t been mentioned, there can
bo no definitions of these; as these could have no objectives
till then; an 1 on the other hand, until the things h we been
defined, people have no definite ideas of them. Hence a
science that seeks to describe the nature of things, operates
both ways ; it points out the things and* gives their definition?.
With regard to the examination or inquiry (into the nature of
thtiigs), the following rule has to be observed : In a case, where
when the definition has been put forward, the real nature of
the tiling, defined 13 not ascertained, on account of such
ascertainment being interrupted by the disturbing element of
another definition,—we have to take recourse to the method of
enquiry and examination, for the setting aside of oae of these
contending theories (definitions); when however, the mere
meutioQ of the definition, gives a due idea of the nature of the
thing defined, then an enquiry or examination is useless, and as
such is not taken up.
Some people hold that a science should operate in all three
ways ( of statement, definition and examination.) These people
also do not examine such things as the purpose Ac. (of the
science); and their only reason for desisting from such examination is that the3e (purpose &c.) are found to be duly recognised on the mere putting forward of their definitions. Such
being the case, the operatiou of science, which is always for the
purpose of a due recognition of the nature of things, cannot be
said to be threefold only.

PltAv'ASTAPÄDA BHÄtfliYA—CHAP. III. SECTION (1)
(1) The * biädecd ' or statement of a thing consist.-? in Its being
spoken of bjj its name. {>?)' Lakt-hana* or Definition consists
in the property that serves to differentiate the h »tnogenoons or like
things from the heterogeneous or unlike onos. .3) Pmikshä or
Examination consists in aa enquiry into the nature offch<ething,
in view of the said defiuition. (4) The aubdividiny of the mentioned thing does not constitute a distinct m-jthod of operation;
as this operation is included in the explanation ih.it we have
given, of the 'statement' of a thing. And the.se subdivisions
are meatioaed separately, only with a view to restricting the
mention of these, and also for the purpose of the potfcing
forward of the definition of each of these subdivisions.
(5) When the things have been subdivided, then we have the
particular definition of each of these; otherwise such
dedaitioas would be wholly devoid of their objectives.
Thus then, we have found that Substances have been
mentioned in the Sütra—'Substance Quality &e. &c.'; they
have been subdivided in the Sütra—'Earth, Water &c. &cf
and hence we now take up the next chapter where we shall put
forward the Specific definition of each of the nine substances;
mentioned above.
NOTE :—The Kiranävali enumerates a few of these 'similarities' and 'dissimilarities.' (1) All the Substances except the Soul, are for the sake of others, and are
unconscious. (2) All except water are devoid of viscidity and fluidity. (3) All
except Fire are uot—bot and incapable of burniug. (4) Space, Time »u<j SCiud are«
devuid of specific qualities &c.
CHATER IV.
Of Special Substances.
1NTKODUCTORV.
Page 27.] Text (35):— We now proceed*to describe the dissimilarities or distinctive features of each one (of
the substances).
Commentary.
What we have finished above is the description of the point

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES.

65

of dissimilarity of two or more things from other seta of two or
more things; in this chapter we are going to point out the
distinctive features of each one of the substances. The 'gas'
affix in the- expression ekaikacah' makes the repitition of the
word ' eka' in licative of the inclusion of many thiugs.
SECTION (1).
THE EARTH.

The author proceeds to point out the distinctive features of
the Earth, which is the first of the substances mentioned
above :—*
Text (36) :—Earth is that which is comprised in the class
'Earth.9
It has the qualities of-—Colour, Taste, Odmr,
Touch, JV umber, D imenaiont Isolation, J D ista ice
Proxim;tyt Gravity, Fluidity,
andAFaculty.
These qualities have been described in the section
(of the Sutra? dialing with the distribution of
qualities) Eor instance, the word Cdkshusha.'
{perceptible by the eye) (in the Sutra) indicates
the seven qua'it*es beginning with ' Number '; the
mention of'pat ma* (fa-ling) impUes 'Gravity';
t'ie merit ion of t\e Earth a* possessing certain
p)intiin common with. Wat:r indicates 'Fluid>t/\
aid the mention ofoxe action (of eai t\)following
upon another indicate Fa^ty
(II—i—1, 6;
IV-i—"; V-i—16,—17,18, 7, II—ii—2; V—ii—1)
As for oduur it belongs tj the Earth only. II-ii-i)
The colour of Earth iß of various hinds viz:—
white and the like.
Ta ti is of six kivdi—sivcet &c,
Od >ur is- of two kinds—good and badIts touch is neither warm nor cool, and is brought
about by cooking. (VII—i—G).'

06

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (1).
Earth is of two kinds: Eternal and Evanescent,
that in the form of the atom is enteral; and that
which is in the form of products is evanescent
The evanescent eai'th is qualified by such an
arrangement of its component particles as tend*
to make it solid or rigid; it comiprises many subclasses ; and supplies many useful things, in the
shape of beds, chair and the like (IV—i—I; II—
iii—4, 5; VII—i—20. 21)
The products of Earth are three-fold,—in the form,
of the Body, the Sense-organ aud the Object of
of perception. (I V—i i—I)
The body is of two kinds : that which is born of
the womb, a*d that which is not so born. (IV-ii-5)
Such of the latter kind as belong to the Gods and the
Ilishis are born independently of the semen and
the ovule, out of adorns acP.d upon by certain
meritorious deeds; while those that belong to the
little insects &c, which serves as bodies fitted for
the experiencing of certain punishments, are
born out of atoms a ted upon by non-men torioua
deeds. The Body born of the womb is produced
from the semen and the ovule. This again is of
two kinds : Viviparous and Oviparous. The former belongs to the man, the cow and other quadrvpcdi; and the latter to bii ds and reptiles, (IV-ii6 to i 1
The Sense-organ, that which makes odour perceptible is the olfatoy organ; this belongs to all
animals, and is madi up of earth-molecules not
affecUd by the molecules of water and other
8ubistance8.\VlH-ii-5) '
The Object, appearing in the order of the Diad
ar*d the rest, is of three kinds: the clay, the ttone and
the vegetable. To the fir st kind belong the various

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Earth.
parts of the earth's surface, and such products of
clay as bricks and walls. To the second belong
the minerals, the various hinds of stones and
gems, the diamond and the like. And of the third
kind are the various grasses, herbs, trees with their
flowers and fruits, creepers, spreading plants, such
trees as bear fruits tuithout flowers, and so forth.
(IV—ii—1)
Commentary.
" Earth is that which is comprised in the class 'Earth.'
This statement points out tbe distinctive feature of Earth for one
who though knowing the general character of Earth is, through
seme delusion, disabled from making use of the word,—with a
view to enable bina to speak of it by itself, independently of
the connection of other things. The sense is that we cau use
the word 'earth 1 with regard to that which is found to have
the general character of 'earth'; as that which is not
spoken of as *earth' is never found to have that general character;
e. g. water and the like, which are not found to have the generic
character of ' earth/ Hence we must use the word * Earth ' ia a
definition of Earth.
Or, the definition may be taken as put forward for the
sake of the person who has often heard the word 'earth' used,
but does not know what the general form of earth is,—in order"
to point out to hitn that character of earth which differentiates
it from ail other things. The sense of the text thus comes to be
that a certain thing is spoken of as' Earth ' in the world because
of its having the general form of Earth. In fact Udyotakara
has defined a definition as that which serves to differentiate
a thing from homogeneous as well as heterogeneous thiugs.
This sets aside the argument that—"if a thing is well known it
need not be defined, and if a thing is not known, it cannot be
defined." As the function of the definition consists in—(I)
enabling it, when known in its generic form, to be used specifically,
an-1 (2) in pointing out its specific features, when it is known in
a general way.

68

PR A^ASTAPÄ DA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (1).

Objection:—" if such be the cas?, then there would be QO end
to it; as like the object th.it is defined, it would, in the end, be
necessary for the d^fiuitioi also to hi defined and explained."
Pago 29] £Uply :—Not so ; as a d -fruition is needed only when
the thing m not duly known or comprehended ; and certainly it is
not possible that there would be an equal want of comprehension
in all cases. For instance, when a learned person receives the •
injunction: ' gauh anu,baiidh>/ah' (the cow should be tied—for
being killed at a sacrifice), he wants to know which part of the
cow's body is to be tied ; and when he is bold that it is to be tied
either in the head (neck) or the le^, he does not stand in need
of any further instruction as to what these two (head and leg)
are. In fact, a person who is wholly ignorant does not require
any instructions; and no instructions are meant for him; as he
would not be entitled to the performance of any actions, like
the infant or the dumb and the like.
The Author next proceeds to show that another distinctive
feature of Eirth consists in its Having fourteen defiaite
qualities, along with its specific quality of Odour. The possessive
affix ' matup' at the end of the Dvandva compound shows that
each of the qunlities mentioned is by itself related to the earth.
The author then proceeds to show that these qualities as
belonging to the earth have been indicated in the Sutras also.
' U-tinctniveQ'idhikara' is that Adhyäya (the second) of the
Sutras which deals with the distribution of the qualities amongSubstmces; and in this Adhyaya. we bave the Stitra—'the Earth
is endowed with Colour, Taste, Odour and Touch,'—which distinctly points to the presence of these qualities in Eirt'i.
"The tuord 'cdlc-ihubsha &c."—this refers to Number,
Dimension, Isolation, Conjunction, Disjunction, Distance and
Proximity,—and also Action (though this is not a quality, yet
it is laid down here as belonging to Earth). All these are
1
cäJc8hu,skat' visible, as they inhere in such subsbances as have
Colour; hence the meaning is that all these qualities belong to

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES: Earth,
the Earth, which has Colour. If these did not exist in coloured
substances, then the author of the Sütra could not have spokea
of them as 'visible' on account of their inhering in such substances.
" The mention of falling &e."—We have the Sütra—
"When th^re is no attempt at conjunction, we have fulling
due to gravity"; and this Sütra distinctly indicates that the
Earth, which is capable of falling, has gravity; as if gravitydid not co-exist with falling {m the Earth), it could not have been
the cause of this falling.
"The mention of the E trth <&c."—we have the Süfra*:
"The earthy substances, Butter, Lac, anJ Beeswax become
nuid on contact with fire; and in this lies their similarity with
Water;" anJ this distinctly sho\fs that to Earth belongs such
fluidity as is due to extraneous causes.
" The mention of one action dec'—We have the Sütra:
"The first action in the ah-ow is produced by the momentum
imparted to.it, and its subsequent motions are due to the faculty
or force produced in it by that action,"—which distinctly mentions the fact of there appearing in the arrow, which is an earthy
substance, a faculty brought about by action ; and this shows
that Earth has speed (a particular form of faculty); as if it'
did not exist in the arrow it could not be the cause of its
subsequent actions. We shall show later on how there is a bingle.
Faculty caused by Falling. ?
" Odour belovgs to the Earth alone"—Th-it is to say, it is
Odour alone that forms the specific distinctive feature of Earth.
Objection:—" We have such ideas as the ivater is sweetsmelling, the Air is fragrant, aud this distinctly shows that we
have odour in other substances (Water, Air) also/'
Reply:—Not so; as in Water, Air &c, the odour that
is perceived is that inhering in the Earth molecules mixed with
those substances.
Question : " How do you ascertain this ? "

70

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHTA—CHAP, IV. SECTION (1).

Answer : Simply fVom the fact of there being-no odour in
the absence of Earth-particles.
Though Colour belongs to the three substances (Earth,
Water and Fire), yet it is spoken of as a distinctive feature of
Earth alone, as it is in this alone that we have the various kinds~
of colour (Water and Fire having each one colour only).
Page 30»] " The colour of Earth is of .various kinds "—The
expression ' Icshitaveua' (in the Earth alone ) has to be taken
along with this sentence also. The sense is that the several
kinds of colour—white, yellow and the like, belong to Earth alone,
and not to any other substance That is to say, in the single
class "Earth" we find inhering many kinds of individual colours.
In certain cases however, we find even an individual earthy object
having many colours, where the object is made up of particles of
various colours.
We now proceed to explain ho w^ this is: Just as the particles go to make the composite whole, so the colours of the
particles go to make up the colour of the whole ; and the
particles have not a single colour white, but various colours, such
as black white, green &c. Nor is, there any such restriction as
that it is only a single colour of these particles, and not the
other, that produces the colour (in the object made up of these
particles); as we find else-where each of these colours having
the capability of producing its like. Nor is it right to assert
that none of these colours can produce their likes, on account
of their .mutually contradictory character. Because we do actually see objects with variegated colours; and it is not possible
for colourless objects to be seen. It might be argued that in such
cases what is seen to be variegated is the aggregate of the several
colours of the component particles; and that it is through this
aggregate that the whole object is seen. But this may be said
with regard to all cases (even the case of objects of siegle
colour); and then it would be necessary to deny the presence of
colour in all objects. Hence it must be admitted that the
variegated colour of the object is produced conjointly by the

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES: Earth,

71

several colours of its component particles; and in as much as
this colour would be produced by causes of different natures
(£. e. the several colours), it could not but consist of the
black, white and green colours ; and it is this that is called
"citra" 'variegated/ It may he argued that it is not possible for
a single object to have a variegated character ; as is declared by
a popular saying—'That a. single object should be of a variegated
colour is extremely wonderful.' But wherein is there any contradiction in this ? as certainly, the various colours, Blue and
the like, are not of the nature of the negation of one another
(as held by the Bauddba) ; aa they are held to have a positive
(and not a negative) character; and also because if they were
held to be the negations of one anothor, there would be a most
objectionable interdependence.
" The contradiction lies in the fact of the difference in the
form."
True ; such a contradiction does exist; yet it is not wrong
to admit of the variegated coloar; specially as its existence is
directly perceived by all men, as originating from various
coloured materials.
Objection-.—"In the case of a multi-coloured piece of cloth,»
in which colours appear only on one side of the cloth, there
would, in accordance with what you say, be a possibility of the
perception of the variegated colour even on the plain side of the
cloth; as the colour belongs to the cloth, which is perceptible on
that side as well, and which is one only."
Reply:—This could not be ; because what is known, on the
ground of invariable concomitance and non-cbncomitance, as
the basis of the perception of the veriegated colour, is the perception of the various colours belonging to the constituent parts
of the coloured object,—a perception which is recognised as one
of the causes of the perception of the variegated colour; and
as the constituent parts of the cloth on the plain side are devoid
of any colours, there could be no perception of the variegated
colour on that side.

72

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSSYA -CHAP. IV, SECTION (1).

" In that case there could be no perception of the variegated
colour in any substauce ; as ail sucfr'subatauces would be made
up of tae diads of various colours ; and these diads having the
invisible atoms for their constituent parts, the colours in questiou could not be perceived ; as there could be no perception of
the colours of these atoms that go to make up the diads."
Who s?*ys it is not so ? It is quite true that we cannot
distinguish the colours of extremely subtle things; it i\oniy in
the case of those substances whose colour can be distinguished,
that we have a petcepti »n of the colours of their constituent pai to.
There are some people who hold that in tiie case of the multicoloured object, what we see are the several variegated colours extending o«ly over certain parts of the object; but for these people
there would be no colour iu a cluth where the two threads are
yellow and blue ; as the colour of neither of these two constituent
threads could bring about the ' variegated' colour. It might
'be argued that in this eise the two colours give rise to a siogle
' varie^atevl' colour. But then, this could be said of all cases
equally: For instance, we can say that'the substance of variegated
colour, that forms the subject of discussion, is related to a
single-coloured object, because it is a substance, like other
substances': and again, ' the colour of that substance is one only
because it is the colour of a material object, like the colour of
other material substances/ ; «and hence the multicoloured object
cannot be said to have several variegated colours, each extending
over a portion of the object certain.
Taste is of six kinds—to be explained as before.
Fage3l.] The pointing out of the various kinds of odour would
be an indirect mention of the forms of E trth; hence the Author
says: Odour is of two kinds. These two kinds are—the Good
and the Bad. What is meant by ' Asurabhi' (Lit: non-goodsmell) is not a mere negation of good smell, but a distinct
odour, contrary in its nature to good odour, inhering in certain
substances, and perceived as something undesirable ; because it
is always perceived in a positive form, in its varying grades.

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES: Earth.

73

The odour that is unnoticeable is that wherein the goodness or
badness ia uot manifested ; and hence this has not been mentioned
as a distinct kind of odour; or, this also may be included ia 'Asurabhi* this word being explained as ' not-surabki' (and certainly
the odour that ia neither good nor bad may be spoken of as ' ÜOÜ
good.*)
The author now proceeds to point out the kind of Touch
that serves to differentiate the Earn from other Substances.
The peculiarity of its touch is that it is brought about by
cooking, and is neither cool nor warm. Though like Touch, the
Colour and Taste also of Earth have the peculiarity of being
brought about by cooking, yet this peculiarity has not been
mentioned in connection with these; because those (Colour and
Taste) have other peculiarities also, and all that is wanted here
is to show the points wherein these differ from those in the
other substances» In th« case of sucl« Euthy things as the
pillar and the like, the fact of their Touch beiug due to cooking,
though not directly perceptible, is to be inferred in the following manner: * the touch of the pillar is due to cooking,—because
it ia a Touch belonging to the Earth, like the Touch of the Jar.'
The fact of the Touch of the Jar being due to cooking is to be
inferred from the fact of its* being such a property of the Jar
a« is perceptible by a «ingle sense-organ,— like the Colour of
the Jar/
The author proceeds to show the subdivision.« of Earth :—
Earth is eternal and non-eternal—The two * ca's are added
with a view to indicate that these two divisions are wholly
inclusive, and no third kind is possible. He next points out
the two kinds: That in the shape of atoms is eternal and
and that in the shape of products is noic-eternal. The word
"lakshawa" in both cases signifies nature or form.
Question: "What are your proofs for the existence of earth
in the shape of "atoms"?

74

PRApASTAPÄDA BHÄ8HYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (1)

Answer: It is Inference : The varying grades in the scale of
minute dimensions must have an end somewhere, — because
it is a scale of dimensions,— like the scale of large dimensions.
And that point wherein that scale ends, further than which
there is nothing minuter, is the At>>m (Lit. the most minute.)
For this very reason, the atom is eternal, on account of its
being a substance without constituent parts, like the Äkaqa.
If it had any constituent parts, it could not be the atom, the
"mo9t minute;" as the parts would be miuuter thau the compound product; and in that case these parts would be the
Atoms; and if this part too were not so, on account of this
too having its constituent parts, then there would be no end
of these parts, and we would have a regressus ai infinitum.
And under the circumstances, in as much as all material things
would be the products of an equally endless number of constituent parts, there would be no actual difference in the dimensions of things; as there would be no difference in the numbers of the constituent factors of things, which difference is the
sole basis of the differentation of things into those of larger
and smaller dimensions. That there is such a differentation
cannot be denied ; hence it must be admitted that there is a
certain thing wherein we have the minutst dimension ; and it is
this minutest thing that is the Atom, and this is eternal.
A single Atom is not productive ; for if-an eternal thing were
singly productive, there would be an unceasing production
of products, aa tS»ere would be no time at which any factor
could be wanting : and this would necessitate the admitting of.
the indestructible character of the products also. As there would
be no destruction of either the substratum or the constituent
parts of these products,— and it is th|e destruction of these
alone that can bring about the destruction of things. Nor
could the combination of three atoms be regarded as productive.
Because as a rule we find that a gross material object is the
product of such factors as are of a smaller dimension than that
object (a jar is made of peices smaller than itself;) and then

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Earth.

75

the Triad must be regarded as the product of something that
is itself a product,— because it is of a gross dimension, like the
ordinary jar. Thus then the productiveness of a single atom,
as well as of three atoms having been rejected, it must be
admitted that it is only two atoms that are productive; and it is
this product, the Diad (two-atoms) that produces all things.
Of Diads, it must be more than two, and not two only, that can be
regarded as productive; as on account of the presence of the
productive cause of the minute dimension of the Diad, it
would be a product of minute dimension that would be produced, and as such the production would be absolutely useless.
This would not be the case when there would be more than
two Diada. Some products are made up of three diads and
these are called "Triads;" some of four or five atoms, and so
forth. Nor are these graduated products absolutely useless;
as the number of the productive Diads goes on increasing, there
is a corresponding increase in the dimension of the product.
Nor would this theory necessitate the belief that all things—such
as the jar—are produced out of diads alone ; as when the jar is
broken we find it reduced to parts of varying dimensions; -and
it is in accordance with these that we attribute the- causality
of the jar. Thus then we find that the Earth in tLe form of
its products, is produced from the diad downwards» And in
this form the Earth is non-eternal ; as we find in it present the
two causes of non-eternality, in the shape of the disruption
of the constituent cause, and the destruction of its substrate»
• The Author next points out another property of Earth
products, that appears along with their noneternnlity : This is
hard or rigid etc. "Etc." refers to such properties as Looseness
(Softness) and the like. It comprises many sub-classes—such as
the "cow" and the like. Though there are no sub-classes in the
atoms, yet we have to admit of such conglomerations of these,
due to the unseen force of destiny as come to produce the subclasses of things made up of those atoms.

76

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. IV. SECTION (1.)

Objection: "The creation of all things is due to the influences of the unseen force ot the Destiny of a human agent;
and what useful function for man does the Earth product perform
that it should have been produced by his destiny ?"
Reply: It supplies the many useful things, in the shape of
be da &e.
The author points ont other useful purposes that the
Earth serves for man: Its products are threefold, as consisting of
the Body &c. The Body is the receptacle of the experiences of the
conscious agent; the dead body is called a "body" because of
its past capability of being 3uch a receptacle. The "Senseorgan" is that substance in the body which is the means of the
direct perception of the cogniser. The "Object" is the substance that serves as the subject of the ageut's experiences.
The author next shows the different kinds of bodies
related to the Earth : It is of two kinds : oviptrous (that born
of the womb) and non-oviparous. By "womb" (ovum) here is
meant the admixture of the man's semen and the woman's
ovule; and the 'oviparous' is that which is born out; of that;
and that which is not so born is the 'non-oviparous;' and this
latter is born independently of the semen and the ovule. This
kind of body belongs to the Gods and the Sages.
Objection : "As a matter of fact we find that there is an
invariable concomitance between the production of the Body*
and the presence of the semen and ovule; how then, could
anybody be produced in the absence of such semen and ovule ?"
Reply: Such bodies are produced out of atoms aided by
particular kinds of virtues. The sense is this: The atoms,
and not a mixture of semen and ovule, are the origin from which
the body is produced; as even in the case of the oviparous
body, what the body is directly produced from are the atoms
wherein have been produced by a process of cooking (modification) certain qualities, following upon the disruption of the
semen and the ovule,—this disruption being due to the law

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES: JSarth.

77

that everything \s to be regarded as destroyed after it has
performed its function. Nor is there any real difference between
the semen and the ovule, and the atoms ; as all these belong to
the Earth. ID case of auch effects, the cause that regulates the
character or kind of each body» lies in an unseen agency
(Destiny») Under the circumstances there can be nothing
unreasonable in the theory that the non-oviparous body is
born out of atoms aided by certain particular virtues.
Objection: "As a matter of fact we find that the production
of all bodies is preceded by an admixture of semen and ovule."
Reply: True; but that fact does not show definitely whether
the sequence of the production of our body to semen &c. is
absolutely independent o£ all unseen agency, or it is the mere
arrangement of the material particles that follows from the
semen &c. This same fact also sets aside the opposite syllogistic argument put forward above; as its basic premises (that
the production of the body is invariably proceded by an admixture of semen and ovule) is open to doubt. We shall deal
with this matter further, on the occasion of -dealing with the
sensuous perception of yogis.
There is a kind o£ the non-oviparous body which is due to
particular sins. Such is the body of the smaller animals— viz.
insects, moths and the like. These bodies are meant to be
puuishmeuts for the ensouling Jlvas: and as such are brought
about by atoms as aided by the effects of particular kinds of
sin. This fact is well known to ail people.
The author now proceeds to describe the oviparous body.
It is the body produced out of the mixture of the semen of
the father and the ovule of the mother. When these two
become mixed up itri\ particular way, the mixture comes to
be acted upon by the digestive fire of the mother; and this
fire having destroyed the qualities of colour &c. of the atoms
making up that; mixture, there appear in it other homogenous
qualities, and the atoms giving rise to the diad, the diad to the

78

?RA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (I).

, we have finally the appearnce of the embryonic
the mind enters into the body at this stage, imd not while
there are mere semen and ovule in their own forms; because
it is only a body that can serve as the substratum for the mind.
A portion of the essence of the food eaten by the mother is
transferred to the foetus. Then this comes to be acced upon
by the unseen force (of the ensouling jiva's deeds.) And the
further action of the internal fire leads to a further dismemberment of the atoms due to their functioning, which brings
about the differentiation of the embryonic body; and then there
appears another body produced out of the atoms costituting
the embryouic body— these atoms acquiring in themselves
certain qualities due to 'cooking', and congregating themselves
with the atoms of food eaten by the mother, which latter begin
to function by reason of the aforesaid unseen force. Thisprocess goes on every day in regard to all bodies,
Page 34»] Question : "What are your proofs for supposing
two distinct bodies (the embryonic and the ordinary) V*
Answer:— We have a proof for this in the difference in
the dimensions of bodies; and certainly a body of larger dimensions could not be contained in another whose dimensions
are sma^er (i. e. the ordinary body of the child could not be
contained in the foetus.)
Objection: — "It would be quite possible for the larger
dimension to be contained in the smaller body, after this latter
has undergone certain modifications."
B'ply :— Would this modification be brought about by the
particles of the smaller body helping the action of the particles
of food, or by the body as helped hy these latter ? In either
case, we wouid in the end, have a number of bodies of varyiog
dimensions; just as we have in the case of pieces of cloth
produced out of yarns. (A.? a piece of cloth is found to consist
of several smaller pieces.) As a matter of fact, however, we do
not come across .such bodies. Hence it must be admitted that the

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES: Earth.

79

body of the foetus is destroyed, aud another body is produced
(out of the particles of the former;) specially as the dimensions
of the bodies must be regarded as different, on account of one
dimension being larger than the other, like the dimensions of
the jar end the saucer; an«! then again the dimension in question (of the foetus) also is destroyed along with its substratum, because it is a dimension, like the dimension of the jar
broken by a stroke of the stick.
Objection :— "The body must be regarded as one only ; as
it is actually recognised to be the same."
Reply:—Not so; because the recognition of sameness can be
explained as being due to similarity. There is always a chance of
such recognition of identity between certain things when these
appear immediately after one another, and when they are
extremely similar to one another; as we find in the case of
Harnes rising from the fire; aud even though there be no such
cognition to the contrary, as that 'these are not the same/ yet
the notion of identity may be rejected on the ground of wellfounded reasoning.
The kinds of Body are now shown: It is of two kinds,
'javdyu' is the placenta; and'that which is born surrounded by it
is the 'jai'äyuja'; and that which is born encased within the
two discs, of an egg is the eggborn, 'andaja'. These two kinds
of bodies are pointed out. The body of men, like ourselves, of
pag\L8 (by 'pacu' here is to be taken the goat because of such
sentences 'agnishomvyam pct,$urn <&c.' and 'saptadag prdjdpatyän
pa$ünäLabketcL where the word means 'goat',) of mrgas (in
the krishnasdra and other species of deer,) and also of other
quadrupeds, belongs to the class of the 'jardyuja ; and to the
class of 'andaja' belong the bodies of birds and serpents, and
fines.
Th^ author next points out the sense-organ related to
the earth. In all animals the organ that brings about the
cognition of smell is made up of earth-particles. In order to

SO

PRA£ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHTA-CHAP. IV. SECTION (I).

show that there is DO such hard and fast rule that the organ
bri&gs about the cognition, of smell only, and not of any other
things related to the earth, the author say«:— It is made up
of earth molecules not affected by the molecules of water Ssc
That is to say, this organ, through the agency of an unseen
force, is made up, in away that distinguishes it from others, of
earth-mo lec&les, whose energy is not weakened by the presence of the molecules of water and other substances; thus
having its production of a peculiar character, it is this organ,
and none other, that is capable of -making smell perceptible.
The name of this is 'ghrdna 'olfactory organ' (nose;) the word
being etymologically explained 'jighratyanerw,'—i.e. that by
means of which the self smells or perceives odour : the existence, of this organ is proved by the preception of smell,—
every action beiug accomplished only by means of a certain
instrument (and the action-of smell-perception has its instrument in the olfactory organ ) ; specially as we do not find any .
smell-perception resulting from the operation of the-visionary
and other organs. And the fact of the olfactory organ
beiug of the earth is proved by its manifesting smell only
from among colour, taste &c. (and smell belongs specifically to the Earth.) As a corroborative instance, we have
the perceptibility of the smell of Kunkuma brought about
by butter. That is to say, as a matter of fact we find
that the butter manifests the smell of the Kunkuma only as
aeconpanied with the smell of the butter itself, and in the same
manner the olfactory organ can be an organ of smell only when
it itself has some sort of a smell. Id is for this reason that
the nose does not perceive its own odour, as it could not perceive
itself.* As in the case of this organ, so in the case of other
organs of Taste &c. also, as we shall show by means of other
instances, th;\t they can have the character of organs only
when endowed with taste, colour &c. And as such they are
not capable of perceiving their own qualities. As for the Ear,
it b an organ Laving sound for its quality (and sound 'does not

SPECIAL StfBSTANCE8 : Mmrik.

81

enter into its constitution, as smell, taste Stc. do in regard
to their respective organs.) and hence it is by means of the
Ear alone that sound is perceived.
The author next points out, hy means of the word 'tu',
the difference of Object from Body and Organ: appearing
in the ord<r of the dind <&<?.-*- This describes what is common
to all earth objects. In the shape of clay, stone &c.—i. e. having
the character of clay, Hone, animals and vegetables. Of these the
different forms in which clay is found are the various portions of
the earth's surface, in their various depths &c,. walls,.bricks,
&c. The forms of minerials are atones, gems (like the sür <*känta,) and the diamond. (The vegetables are) grasses, the
cereal grains, (e.g. the wheat) the trees with flowers and fruits (like
the koviddra,) creepeva, spreading plants (like the hetah%,) and
those trees that have fruits without flowers (e.g. the audumbara.)
Objection: "The name 'stkävara' implies the absenee of
self-initiated motion; and this applies to the minerals as well
as vegetables (why then should the name be applied to these
latter only ?')
Reply: True, it is so ; but in as much as stone &c. have
other characteristics also, they are not spoken of by that Dame.
NOTES:—(I) Prthimtvabhitambandhat prthivi—ln thi» sentence the most
general definition ot Prthivi ha* been attempted. ' Barth in that which is related
to and belongs to the generality or genus earth, ; though tbia doe« not add anything
to cur knowledge of earth, yet it caunot b* denied that this ia the most universal
definition possible.
( 2 ) Päkuja—Lit. produced by cookiug or baking; according to the VaifSshikas,
the touch of earth and all earthy tilings, ia ' produced by baking '; and so also
are their colour and taste. Whac appears to be meant by thi« is that the touch,
colour aod taste of atl earthy thinsrs are changed byfire-contact; while of ail
other substances these qualities remain constant. This is the only explanation
possible : otherwise ifc is uofc very easy to understand how the colour or touch of a
clod of earth lying iu thefield»can be regarded a« produced byfirtcontact.

(37.)

SECTION (2).
OIF1' W J L T I Z S K / .
Water U that which is comprised in the class
'water. It has the following qualities: Colour,
Taste. Tovch, Fluidity, Viscidity, Number,
Dimension, Separateness, Conjunction, Disjunc-

82

?BA£ASTAPÄDA BflÄSHTA—CHAP, IV. SECTION (2).
tion, Distance, Proxinity, Gravity and Faculty.
These also are indicated by the sutra in the same
way en the qualities of JSmth.
The colour of water is white; its taste is
sweet; its touch is cool. Viscidity belongs to the
^mter alone; as also doe* natural Fluidity.
(II—i—2; IV—i —11; II—ii—5; V—i—17 ;
V—ii—3 to 6; 8, 11.)

:•

Page 36.] Like Earth, Water a1so is of two kinds—eterna7 and noneternal. Its products are threefold,
in Hie shape of the Body, the 8en*e-organ and the
Object. The Body (of water) iß one that is not
born of the womb ; and is known to exist only
in the regions of Varuna. These aqueous bodies
however are mad-i capable of experiencing pleasure,
pain <&c, by the admixture of Earth-molecules.
The aqueous sense-organ is the organ of Ta*te,
which serves to make Taste perceptible by all living
beings, and is made up of aqueous atoms only,
without any part of the molecules of other substances. The aqueous Object exists in the shape
of Rivers, Oceans, the Moon, Rails and the like.
(IV—i—1 to 5; IV—ii—1, 6 to 11; VII—i—20,21;
VIII—ii—6; V—ii—8; IV—ii—1.)
Commentary.

The author now proceeds to define Water. Here also the
purpose of the definition lies in the fulfilment of the purposes
to he served by the word, or in the differentiation of the thing
defiued from ali other things, like and unlike.
The following objection might here he urged: "A person
" could expUin a thing for another person by means of a defini" tion, only when he himself knows the distinguishing features
" of the thing; as one who does not know a thing himself could

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Water.

83

" not explain it to another. The difference of one object
* from, another however lies in their mutual negation ; and
" this negation could be cognised only when both members of the
"negation have been cognised; otherwise ^e could have no
" such negation as 'the cow is not a horse', where the character
" of one thing (the horse) is denied of another thing (the cow;. Now
"then, we ask—Is this mutual negation cognised by a mixed
u
cognition of both these things, or by a cognition of each of
" these as distinct ? In the former case, we could have no such no" tion as 'this is not that;' and in the latter case, the said notion
'• of negation would involve a mutual interdependence; as the cog" nition of negation would be due to the cognition of each as dis" tinct from the other, and the cognition of each as distinct from
" the other would be due to a perception of their mutual negation
"as negation is the same as distinction,'*
To the above we make the following reply:—As a matter
of fact, there is a mutual negation between two things that are
distiuct from each other, and distinction is not the same as
mutual negation ; as the distinction of a thing consists in its
own specific form ; and certainly a cognition of this latter does
not depend upon the perception of any other thing,—proceeding,
as it does, from direct sense-contact; and this specific form of
each object is cognised as distinct by itself. For instance, when
a man is in search of the cow, he does not proceed to tike the
horse if he happens to see it; nor does he recall to his mind
(necessarily) the word 'cow'; consequently there would be nothing incompatible in the coguitioc of the mutual negation between the cow and the horse, as brought about by a due recognition of the distinctive features of the cow and the horse, each
independently by itself. Nor could it be urged that in that
case, we may totally deny mutual negation, and admit only of
the difference in the distinctive features of each thing. Because
we do have a distinct cognition of mutual negation, in the
negative form, (while the cognition of the distinctive features of
each thing is always in the positive form).1

$4

?RA£ASTAPÄDA BHÄSÖtA—CHAP. IV. 8ÄCTI0H (2).

•»
PagO 37.1 ^ la MOt <x^ueousness alone that constitutes the distinctive feature of Water, a ad the author proceeds to show that
It is distinguished by the presence of fourteen qualities accompanied by fluidity. The compound 'rüparasaf, etc. must
be ürst explained as a Dva-ndva, and then the Possessive
aj£i added» The mention of these in the sütra is to be shown
in the same way as in the case of the qualities of Earth. We
have the Sütra—'Rüparasaspargavatya äpah, dravdh, snigdkacga" » As for number etc. belonging to Water, this is to be
found in the same sütra that has been shown to apply to the
case of Earth.
In as much as on the occasion of pointing out the distinctive features of each substance, it would not be proper to mention colour &c. in these general terms,—these being common to
the earth <&c. also,—the author points out the- particular forms
offchesequalities that belong specifically to Water. The colour
of Water is white, its taste is sweet, and its touch is cool. As
for the appearance of other colours ip water, it must be regarded
as due to the colour of the reqeptacie of the water: because
when the water is thrown upwards, it is always perceived to be
of a distinctly white colour.
Objection : " Water cannot be regarded to have the sweet
taste, as it is never found to be sweet in the same way as 3ugar
&c. are."
Reply: Not so; Water is found to have a taste quite
different from any of the other five tastes—th« Acrid, Astringent, Bitter, Saltish and Acid ; and as for the sweetness not
being perceived as in sugar &c. that must be regarded as being
due to the absence of any excessive degree of sweetness.
By the declaration—'Viscidity belongs to Water alone'—is
meant that unqualified Viscidity is found in Water only. It
might be urgued that Viscidity is fouud in earthy substances
also, such as in milk, oil and butter. But as a matter of fact
we find th*t no Viscidity is present in such purely earthy substances as stones, bricks, dry fuel &c; and hence the Viscidity

3PECIAL SUBSTANCES : Watet.
that is found in a few Earthy Substances like oil, butter &c.
be regarded as belougiug to the Water with which the earth
particles are mixed up; just as is the case of the natural
fluidity, that we meet with in milk and oil. Tha fact of Viscidity
being a quality of Water is proved by the one being always
found with, and never without, the other. It is for this reason
that we find a certain degree of smoothness in the trees and"
shrubs growing in the vicinity of human habitations* and
dry ness and roughness in those growing in the forest,—this
being due to the fact of the former having their roots always
watered with the water thrown about by the people, while the
latter have no such supply of water.
Natural Fluidity also belongs to Water alone; that is to
say, it is not Viscidity alone, but natural Fluidity also, that belongs specifically to Water only. As for milk and oil, their
Fluidity must be regarded as due to the proximity of their substrate (t. «. the water in which they are contained ) ; because
under certain circumstances they^are found in the solid form.
Like the Earth, Water also exists in a twofold form the
eternal and the non-eternal; that in the shape of atoms being
eternal, and that in the shape of the various products being noneternal.
The products are of three kinds. -The explanation of this
is as in the case of Earth-prod acts ; that is to say, as in the case
of Earth we have products in the shape of the Body, the^Orgaa
and the Object, so we have in the case of Water also.
The aqueous body is never born of the womb—of earthy
bodies some are born of the womb and some are not so born ;
while the aqueous body is always such as is never born of the
womb.
Question : " Ao earthy body we find in the case of man,—
this being regarded as earthly because endowed with the quality
of smell; where do we find the Aqueous body ? "

36

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BflÄSÜYA-CHAP. IV. SECTION <2).

Answer : In the regions of Varuna. The existence of this
body is to be believed ia on the strength of scriptural texts
pointing to the existence of such bodies*
Page 38»3 Question : "la as much as Water has the character
of a single substance, the Aqueous body would always be in the
form of the Bubble &c; and a9 much how could such a body be
capable of bringing about the ordinary erperieneces. ? '*
Answer: The aqueous body is capable of bringing about
experiences, by reason of its containing particles of earth also.
In the production of the aqueous body the particles of Earth
servo as the instrumental causes; and the natural fluidity of
water having been controlled by these earth-particles, there is
brought into existence a peculiar body, not in the shape of mere
watery bubbles &a
Some people define the Body as something that is made
up of the five elementary substances ( lit. having these for ite
material cause). But if ft were so> then, firstly the body could not
have any odour ; because such odour could only be produced by
the odour in one of its material causes, which is not possible.
Secondly the body would have a variegated colour and touch ;
in as much as Äs five constituent causes would have distinct
colours and touches ; and as a matter of fact we do not find
this to be the case; hence the Body can not be rightly regarded
as made op of the five elementary substances. For similar
reasons it can not be regarded as made up of Earth and Water ;
nor could it be held to be made up of Earth, Water and Air ;
and if it were made up of Earth, Air and Aka$ay then it would
be wholly devoid of colour, taste and odour ( as the Akdga is
devoid of these) ; if it were made up of Fire, Water and Ahdga,
then it would be without Odour and Taste ; and so forth.
Thirdly, if the body had the five elementary substances for its
material cause, then it could not be one only ; as a diversity of
causes must bring about diversity in the effect. Therefore we
must admit that the human body is made up of earth,—because

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Water.

37

it has odour—like the Earth iu the atomic state. As for the
presence of the properties of Water and other substances that
we meet with in the Earth, they must be regarded as belonging
to the Water <kc. mixed up with the Body.
The Sense-organ is that which renders Taste perceptible
to all living brings. That is to say, that sense-organ which
makes Taste perceptible for all living beings is one that is made
up of Water-molecules. In order to account for the fact of
that organ alone, and no other aqueous object, making Taste
perceptible, the author adds : The water molecules of which the
sense-organ is made up is not affected (or accompanied) by any.
heterogenous molecules, such as those of the Earth and other
substances. That is to say, these latter do not in any way
weaken the effeciency of the aqueous molecules making up the
organ in question. This is the reason why this organ is wholly
distinct in character from all other'substances ; and thus having
its production of a character distinct frern everything else, it is
this organ alone that brings about a perception of Taste, which
can not be done by any thing else ; as nothing else is produced
in the same way as the organ under consideration. All this is
assofered on the ground of our actual experience, which shows
that taste is perceived by the orgau of Taste, and by nothing
else.
The existence of the organ of Taste is proved by the perception that we have of Taste ; as every action must be brought
about by some instrumental cause. Aod the fact of this organ
being aqueous in its nature is inferred from the fact of its bringing about the perception of Taste only, from among colour and
the rest,—like the saliva which is evaporised in the mouth.
The aqueous objects are—the Rivers, the Oceans, Snow,
Hail and other such things,—which are enjoyed, and as such
become the means of tbe accomplishment of the experience of the
agent.

PRÄ9A3TAPÄDA 3H1SHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (3).
SECTION (3).—OF FIRE.

Ttxt (38). Fire ia that which, belongs to the class of
'Fire.1 It is endowed with—Colour, Touch,
Number, Dimension, Soparnieness, Conjunction,
Distinction, Diatance, Proximity, Fluidity, and
Faculty.
Page 39.] The fact of these belonging to Fire
is to be shewn, as before, to be indicated in the
mtras. Its colour is white and brilliant Its touch
i* hot only. (II—i—3, 7; IV—i—ii; V—il—8 ;
II—ii—4; V—i—17). This also is twofold, in the
form of the atom and the products. These products are threefold, in the shape of the Body 4ce.t
(IV—-i—1 to 5; VII—i—20, 21; IV—ii—1),
The Body of fire is such only as is not born
of the womb, existing in the regions of the Sun
(Äditya); an<} it is made capable of experience by
the, admixture of earth-molecules. (IV—ii—ßtol 1).
The Sense-organ is the Eye which makes colour,
perceptible, by all living beings, and which is
made up of fire-molecules unaffected by the molecules of any other substance. (VIII—ii—6).
This object is fourfold:
Earthly, Heavenly,
Stomachic ( organic ) and Mineral. The Earthly
fire is that which consists of Flames produced by
wooden fuels, and ü capable of accomplishing cooking, burning, softening (according to tlie Kan*
dall) sweating <&c. The Heavenly Fire is that
which is produced by watery fuel, and exists
in the form of the Sun, the Lightning and the like.
The Stomachic Fire is that which brings about
the digestion of the food that is eaten. The
Mineral Fire exists in the form of Gold and other
metals. (IV—ii—1; V—ii—13).
The experience of taste &c. in these minerals
belongs to another substance compounded with the
Fire-molecules.

8PECIAL SUBSTANCES : Plrc.
Commentary.
Fire is &c.—To be explained as before. Like the generic
character of 'Fire', the eleven qualities,, colour &e. also, are its
distinctive features. The mention of these in the Sutras may
be shown as before, in the case of Earth and Water. For instance,, we have the sütra—'Fire also is ^endowed xoith Colour
and Touch! As for Number and the rest, the same Sütra
points out these ^a belon^iug to Fire and Earth &c.
The colour of Fire is white and brilliant. The white colour
belongs to Earth and Water also; but in these latter it is not
brilM&nt\'that is to say, a colour bright enough to be self-luminous
belongs to Fire alone; hence it serves as the distinctive feature
of this latter. The red or yellow colour that is sometimes seen
in Fire must he regarded as being, due to certain extraneous
conditions; as it is-only the white colour that is seen in all
cases of Fire ; as we find in the case of the light of a lamp, and
hat emitted by the Sun and the Moqn.
Its Touch is hot only. The Touch of Earth, Water and Air
is'neither—hot—nor—cold,' 'cold' and 'neither—hot—nor—
cold ' respectively; while that of Fire is 'bot' only, which serves
as its distinguishing feature.
Page 40.] Like Earth and Water, Fire also is twofold, in the
shape of the Atom and its Products. The Product is threefold—in
the form of Body, Sense-organ and Object. The Fiery body is
such as is not bora from the womb, and is kuown to exist in the
Regions of the Sun only.
Objection : " Fire being of a burning nature, any body
made* of it would be like a mass of fire, and .as such, incapable
of any business operations ; and hence it could not be the
suhstratum of any experiences."
In reply to this we-have the statement that it is by reason
of the admixture of Earth-molecules that the molecules of Fire
bring about the Fiery Body; and the body could not be a maaa
of Fire pure and simple.

§0

PRÄ^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION <3).

The Sense-organ that helps to make colour perceptible
to all living' beings is made up of Fire molecules. In support
of the theory that colour is rendered perceptible only by this
particular product of Fire, and uofc by any other products of
Fire,—we have the following reasons : This sense-organ is made
up of such Fire-ruolecules as are not affected by the particles of
any other substance ; i. e. in this organ of vision, the Firemolecules do not have their potency weakened by the admixture
of any heterogeuous molecules of Earth or Water ; and hence
having an origin peculiar to itself, it is this organ alone" that
is capable of manifesting colour ; and that nothing else is produced in the same manner, being a well recognised fact, must
be attributed to an unseen ( superphysicai) force ; and its proof
lies iu the fact of the character of the products themselves.
Then, the fact of the sense of vision being fiery in its nature
must be inferred from the f ict of its niauifesting colour alone
from among other qualities,—like the lamp. This organ of vision
is without any manifested colour or touch ; and it is for this
reason that ic does not burn its physical substrate, and is itsetf
not seen ( for want of a perceptible colour).
The Object of Fire is fourfold—the Earthly &c. The particle (tatra* means 'from among these/
The Earthly is that which is produced from such Earthly
things as the fuel of wood,—fire not being produced without
some such substratum. * Wood ' includes grasses &c. also, in*
as much as these also are found to be productive of fire. This
Earthly Fire has the nature of flaming upwards ; it is capable
of accomplishing the actions of cooking, sweating, softening &c.
The action-of 'cooking* consist» in bringing about) properties (or
conditions) not present in the thing befori ; and ' sweating' or
'softening' consists in the destroying of the hardness of things.
' Etc' includes such other actions as 'producing cracks.' This
points out the useful actions accomplished by Fire.
The Heavenly Fire is that which is produced from watery

SPECMAL STJBSTA&GBS-. Fhi.
fuel; and ^xiste in the form of the Son, the lightning, the meteor
and the Irke.
The Stomachic or Organic Fire serves the purpofee of digesting the food that is eaten ; that is to say, it- tends to change the
food into the condition of certain juices, excreta aod other
substances.
The Mineral Fire is found in the form of Gold &c. The fact
of Gold &c. being fiery in their nature is proved by seriptures.
The argument in favour of this view has already been shown.
(Com. Page 26.)
Question : " Gold &c. being fiery, (and as such having a
hot touch and being devoid of Odour and Taste), how is it thai
they are found to have odours aud tastes, and to have a touch that
is neither hot nor cold } "
Answer: By reason of the unseen agency of the destiny
of the experiencing persons, Gold &c. are produced in the solidifi*
able* form, endowed with a touch that is neither hot aor cold—
by reason of the admixture of particles of Earth ; and the t&sto
&c. that are perceived belong to tnese fiartK-particlea.
Page 41*1 Objection: M We cannot admit of the declaration
that Gold has no manifested touch &c., a« there are no Substance«
apart from the colour, touch &c. that are perceived ( i. «. the
qualities are the oaly real entities, and there is no such thing as a
substance independent of the qualities perceived). C msequenfcly, in the case of the Gold we cannot admit of the existence of
any unseen and untouched particles of Fire, or any other thing,
except that of the yellow colour and th^e particular Touch &c,;
and as suck Gold cannot be regarded as Fiery in its nature."
Reply: It is not so ; because in ordinary experience, we fiud
the same colour ( of whiteness) and other qualities existing in
various substrata, in tne shape of the 'pillar,' the 'jar' and the
like ; and if there were no Substance apart from the qualities,
what would constitute these various substrata of the same qualities ? That is to say, we hare the notions—'this U * pillar', 'this
MF ajar' — that pertain to the difFerent shape of each of tne1 tilings

92

?RA<?ASTAPÄDA BflÄSHrA—CHAP, IV. SECTION (3).

cognised, srith out any (necessary) idea of their colour &c.,—the
character of being coloured &c. belonging equally to all objects.
Objection": "The different cognitions that we have with
regard to each object is due to the difference in the previous
ideas or impressions that we may have in our mind, with regard
to the material masses observed ( and hence the cognitions
must be admitted, in all cases, to be of the same colour, and the
notion of the difference in substrata must be regarded as being
due to the previous impressions in the mind of the observer.)"
Reply : In that case the different cognitions that we have
of the various colours &c may also le attributed to the
differences iu the previous ideas that we may have ; and as such
we might deny the existence of the different colours &c. fad mitting the existence of only one colour, explaining the variety of
colour—perception as being due to existing impressions in the
observer's mind.) [ And this would lead ua to idealism pure
and simple.]
Objection: wIf no such thing, as the Blue colour/.i*., had a
ieal existence in the external world, then the ideas or impression»
of these would depend, for their appearance, solely upon their
own series (san/dna, which is endless); and as such it woulJ not
be possible for these impressions to appear at certain times only
and oot at all times; and hence if the differentiation of Blue &c.
depended upon these impressions only, then it would not be possible for these colours to be perceived at certain times ( i. e.
the impressions having a continuous existence, the perception
df Blue would also be continuous); and in as much as we do not
find this to be the case in ordinary experience, the differences
of Blue &c. canoot be regarded as due to those Impressions; and
it is for this reason that we postulate a variety of colours."
Reply : In the case of the different cognitions with regard
to the pillar &c. also, if they did not depend upon some
objetit having an existence in the external world,—there would
be no possiblity of their appearing at certain times only ; and

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Firt.
hence with regard to each object we shouid assume a particular
material form apart from the qualities of colour &a, which
would be the instigating cause of the impressions in connection
with euch objective mass perceived. It is thus alone that we
could explain the fact of a single object being perceived by
means of the «two actions of seeing and touching ( both shese
action« applying to the said shape). This would be impossible if
an object consisted solely of colour and its other properties ; as
each of these would be perceptible by a distinct dense-organ,
(and we would in such cases have the idea of two 'objects', as
there would be nothing in the shape of a material object that
could be amenable to a combined perception by two or more
sense-operations). Then again, as a matter of fact, Colour and
the other similar qualities belonging to the atoms» would be
supersensuous; and as for you there is no objective mass.('independent of the atoms with the said colour &c), what oould be
the object of the said seeing and touching ?
Objection : " Though each atom by itself is supersensuous,
yet, when there is a certain operation of the mind iu connection
with the sense-organs, the atoms are rendered capable ( of accomplishing certaiu purposes) ; and then they become amenable
to sense-perception."
Reply : This could not be ; because the becoming capable
cannot set aside the inherent subtile (imperceptible) character
of the atoms; and if the mere becoming capable could make a
thing perceptible by the «rases, then the operation of the mind
and the sense-organs themselves would also become perceptible
( as these also are made capable of serving some useful purpose,
and it is a universally admitted fact that the sense-organs themselves are imperceptible, being extremely subtile in their
character, and only nominally material).
Objection: " Though atoms individually are subtile and
imperceptible, yet when they aggregate together, then they aoquire ft certain degree of groesnees, like a mass of b?ir ( each

94

PRA^ASTAPÄDA SHlSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (3.)

singly being invisible ) ; and as they become visible, they appear
as "one only."
Reply: Does the gross form become actually produced io
these many atoms, at the tirae^ou speak of? or, is it as in the
case of hair, the grossness being only imposed upon the aggregate,
and not existing in reality ? If it is produced in the atoms them»elves, then that aggregate gross form would be what is regarded
as the composite 'substance ( apart from the qualities that may
belong to them.; While if it be not really existent in them,
but be perceived only as imposed upon them, then such a perception could only be a misconception. But then, every misconception must have a counterpart reality somewhere in existence ; consequently it would be necessary for you to admit of
the real existence of even a single gross objective mass somewhere. This reality of grossness could not belong to an Idea;
as we do not und any such idea appearing as that ' I am. gross;'
and secoudly because in that case there would be no gross object
that could be perceived in common by more than one person
(the idea of each person belonging to him and him alone).
For these reasons, it must be admitted that there is a singU
grofl3 substance (and it is not a mere collection of qualities):
because the object is always perceived as having the same grosa
form (while its qualities are adventitious and variable); and because it is found to operate towards the accomplishment of
definite useful purposes (which could not bs done by in«r$
qualities). And thus the existence of the material Substance
(independently of the qualities of colour &c.) is established.
Objection : " It is only when a eognition is not subsequently fitüfnred by a notion to the contrary, that it is accepted as
tru9, and th? object cognised regarded as having a real existence ; in the case of the composite Substance, however, we find
its cognition followed by a contrary notion :—viz. * when the
hand is shaken, the body related to it does not shake, and when
the leg i«§ »haken the body is not found to shake ; and (if the

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Fire,
Body were a composite whole made up of the band &&). then
one aud the .same hody would have two contradictory conditions
(of shaking and not shaking) (and so the notion of the composite
apart from the constituent atoms and qualities must be regarded
aa a misconception)."
Reply: This is not right; as there is no such hard and fast
rule as that when the hand shakes the body must aiso shake;
as a matter of fact, we find that when there is cause for the
shaking of the hand only, it is the hand alone that shakes, and
not the body, for the simple reason that there is no cause for
the shaking of this latter; and when there is a cause for the
shaking of the body also, then this also shakes ; where is there
a contradiction in this?
Page 42.] Objection " If the body does not move when
the hand moves, then there would be an absence of inherent
in^parable relationship between them."
Reply : Not so ; because, what is meant by the absence of
such relationship is that the two have an existence apart from
each othar ; and not that while the one moves the other does
not move; for we find that while the Substance moves the
qualities inhering therein do not move (though the relationship
between the Substance and its qualities is universally recognised
to be inseparable). And as for having an existeoce apart from
each other, this can never be the case with the whole and the
part, even though these be totally different from each other.
Consequently in the case in question there could be no absence
of inseparable relationship.
Another contrary notion that is pnt forward by the opponent is this:—" In any object, if a part of it happens to be
covered up, (and we touch the object), there iß no touching of
the object wherein the covered op part inheres, while there is a
touching of that wherein inhere« the uncovered part; and
thus ( if the object wherein the two parts inhere were a single
composite whole) then we would have a touching and not touching of the same object and at the same time."

96

PaAgASTAPÄDA 3HÄSHYA-CHAP. IV. SECTION (3).

There is not much weight in this objection either; because,
the covering of the part does not make übe whole<. covered up;
and the reason for this is that the single whole inheres in its
many parts ; and as such.even when a number of its parts are
covered up, if it happens to be touched in the uncovered parts,
it also becomes touched through them ; specially as it is the
same in all its parts.
As for the non-recognition of the gross form of the object,
as also the nan-perception of the larger number of its component
particles»—that is due to the absence of the perception of the
aggregations of the several compouent particles, which perception is the basis of the recognition of the varying degrees of
dimension That is to say, in a ease where a larger number of
component particles are covered up, and only a smaller number of
them visible, there is no perception of the component whole;
as for instance, when a man is immersed in water, with his head
above the water, we, seeing the head only, are not said to see
the body. Then again, when one part of an object is red, the
object is red iu that part only, while over the rest of it it is
not-red; and thus we find that there is nothing absurd in a
single object being both red and not-red. And the reason is
simple: red ness consists only in a conjunction with reddening
materials, while 7wn-redness consists iu the absence of such
flifcfcpriai; &t*d it 13 quite possible for both of these to belong to
the same object (in its parfcs ); as conjunction is not an allpervading quality (but exists only in parts of objects).
Objection ; " There is yet another objection to the idea of
the complete whole: The whole could exist in each of the ]*urt8
either in its complete form or partially only ; for certainly, there
is no third way. As a matter of fact however, it could not exist
in them only partiully ; as it has no pnrts of it apart from the
component parts themselves. Then, i£ it existed in each of them
in its complete form, then it could not exist in any but a single
component particle ; AS tue whole of it being taken up by the con-

SPECIAL S0B3TANCE3 : Fin,
junction of that single particle, there would ba no room for the
other particles, specially as the whole has no other form save
that which would be existing in that single particle."
In this connection, we should think over the following
points: You declare that a thing can exist either wholly or
partially :—well, do you nVike this declaration as accepted by
yourself, or as admitted by your opponent ? As for yourself, you
the Bauddha donot admit of the existence ( or inherence ) of a
tiling in any other thing. While as for your oppooeut^ he does
admit of the said total and partial existence ; becau3s totality
and partiality are not, according to him, the methods of existence; nor are these the basis of the said existence. Aa %
matter of fact, that which exists, does so either by itself, or ia
the relationship of the container and the contained, with something else; and certainly there can be no absurdity in a single
thing having more than one connection;as for instance, we actually
find, in the case of an object of variegated colour, the connection
or relationship of yellow and the other colours in objects possessed of the blue colour also; nor in this case does the object differ
with each distinct colour ; and if you did not consider it possible
for a single object to have various colours, then it would not
be possible for you to have any cognition of the variegated
colour. Nor can the fact of the cognition or idea of the object
being one only be urged as a ground for the singleness of its
colour only; as this would be in direct contradiction to the
well-known perception of the variegated colour. And just as in
the case of a composite whole, made up of a number of component
particles, there is room for other particles, even though the
object is connected with one particle, as is perceived by the
sense*,—so, in the same manner, we also perceive the connectiou of many particles in a single object of the gross form. As
for the declaration that we see the connection of many things
in a single object, and not the connectiou of one with many
things,—that is & mere point of difference between tbe nature
of the two ; as the factor of the connection of many things (one

98

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA ßHlSUYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (3).

way or the other) is common to both cases. Thus then, we
have refuted both of the following statements: (1) that " that
which is one can exist in a single point of place, as for instance
a single colour, and a single composite whole ", and (2) that
" that which exists over a number of points in space must be
many and diverse,—e.g. the palm fruits contained iu a number of
vessels, and the composite whole existing over a number of component parts.
Then again, the premiss brought forward by you is incap^able of being established either for yourself or for your opponent.
As for yourself, you hold that a single Idea, by it« very appearance, exists in a number of things, such as the object, the senseorgan, and the operation of the mind. And as for your opponent, he too believes in the fact of a single thread being in conjunction with a number of beads ( strung on to it). And in the
same manner, the composite whole can very well exist by inherence in a number of component parts,—without, thereby,
becoming diverse.
Thus then, the very basis of your objection having fallen off
on all sides, the objection itself faLls to the ground unsupported ;
as if there were no composite whole, and the whole world consisted of atoms alone, then there could be no chance.of the cognitions of the subject, the common character and the instance ( of
your iuferential argument); and hence the argument would
have no existence. Consequently any such argument cannot
set aside the existence of the composite whole, which is perceived
directly by the senses.
Objection : " This sense-perception may be a misconception,
in as much as it is found to be subsequently set aside by a contrary notion."
Reply : If it were so, then you would fall into the vicious
circle of mutual interdependence—the falsity of sense-perception
being proved by the presence of the contrary notion; and the
correctness of this contrary notion being dependent upon the

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Fire.

99

falsity of the .sense-perception. As a matter of fact, the ordinary
rule (of bfiuy: set aside by contrary notions ) does not apply to
the case of senserperception, which is independent of all other
considerations. Nor is it proper to declare, as false or mistaken
a cognition (of sense-perception) which is found to be compatible
with the useful functioning of things, which is universally accepted
as true, and which is manifest to all people; as in that case, such
ordinary sense-cognitions as those of the blue colour would also
become false. In this way is our theory freed from the danger of
being set aside by any contrary notions.
Though the existence of atoms is only inferred from the
grosser products, yet certain usages of the world must be based
upon them.
Objection: u [ The process of the appearance of gross products has been described hy ypu as beginning with the aggregate
of three diads—which would consist, of six atoms.] This simultaneous conjunction of the atom with six atoms would make
the atom consist of six parts, ( each part l«ing connected with
each of the other atoms, and this would do away with the atomic
character itself."
Reply : What do you mean by this ' simultaneous conjunction ' ? Does it mean that one atom is produced simultaneously,
aloog with six other atoms? or does it mean that the one atom
becomes simultaneously connected with the six atoms? As for
simultaneous production, if there be such a production of even
an impossible thing, through the simultaneous operation of the
productive cause,*—what absurdity would there be in this ? As
for simultaneous coojunction, that too is not incompatible.
(1) As the conjunction of eubstancee does not refer to its parts,
as even an impartite substance, like Akäfa has conjunction ;
and (2) if there wer« parta also, then the conjunction existing
in the final atom only, no conjunction would be perceptible.
The conjunction of substances is actually found to lie in the
forms of the substances tbem3elves. Such being the case, as in the

100

PKA<?ASTAP&DA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (4).

case of the partite substance, so in that of the impartite atom
also, when there would a simultaneous conjunction of a single
atom with several others whenever there would be sufficient
cause for this; and there would be nothing objectionable in that.
NOT«.—Ever since Vai9§suika philosophy became known to the western world,
it has continued to be laughed at fur holding that Gold, and all other metals, are
in their very esaeuce, of the nature of Fire. No attempt has yet been made to
refute the argument that they put forward in support of this view. Melted gold
continue» ia the molten condition, even ou the application of extreme heat; it
does not become entirely dissipated, as all other non-fiery things are, by the contact of fire. Even at the present day, in an age of electric arc-lights and furnace«
it is not very easy to determine whether the application of any degree of it will
entirely dissipate th» gold ; aud it U no wonder that it was regarded aa nondisaipating by the philosopher» of old. And when once this fact is admitted ther«
can b« no escape from the conclusion that gold iafieryin its essence.
SECTION

(4)

.
}
Page 44.] Text (39) Air is that which belongs to the class
'Air' It hasthe following qualities: Touch, Number,
Dimension, Isolation, Conjunction, Disjunction,
Proximity, Distance and Faculty.
The touch of Air is neither warm nor cool,
and is not due to 'baking.' This w indicated
by the süträ which lays down Touch as the
quality of Air,
The existence of the seven qualities, beginning
with number, in the colourless Air is indicated
by the declaration in the süUö that 'of colourless
substances the number and other qualities are not
visible1—The existence of faculty in Air is indicated by the mention (in the süträ) of the shaking
of grasses [being due to the contact of Air.) M-i-4;
IV-i-12;V-i-U.)
A ir aUo is of two kinds; in the shape of atoms
and their product*. The Products are fourfoldt
O P AIR.

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES: Mr.
in the shape of the Body, the Sen»e-organt the Object
and Breath. (lV-i-1 to 5; II-i-11 to 13; IV-ii-1;
VII-i-20, 21.)
The Airy Body is not born from the womb, and
is known to exist in the region of the Maruts ; it is
made capable of experiencing sensations by reason
of the admixture of Earth-particles. (VIII-ii-6.)
The Airy Sense-organ pervading all over the
body, is that of Touch, which enables all living
beings to ftel touch. Is is made up of Air-molecules exclusively, and is free frofk the molecules
of all other substances. II-i-9, 10, 16.)
The Airy Object is that which is actually
perceived as Air, the substratum of all Touch;
its existence is indicated by Touch, Sound, Steadiness and Shaking. It mooes horizontally, and
is capable of moving and holding the clouds and
other things.
Though Air is not visible, yet its numeroueness
is inferred from the collapse of winds,—this collapse being due to the collision of two contrary
winds blowing with equal velocity; this collision
is inferred from the upward motion of Air,—
which upward motion again is inferred from the
fact of tufts of grass and other things being seen
to rise in the Air ( whenever there is such a
collision). (IV-i-17 ; II-i-14. 5.)
Breath is the Air in the body; it serves the
purpose of moving about the various fluids,
secretions and other materials in the body. This
Air in the body comes to be known as 'Präna''Apäna\
'Satnäna', 'Udäna ' and 'Vyäna', on account of its
various functions (of moving up, down &c.)

302

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (4).

€ommentaryHaving- dealt wick the three visible Substances—Earth,
Water and Fire—the author now desfcU with Air, specially as
he has. been treating of such Substances as are both eteraai and
non-eternal. &c. &a &c.
Page 45-3 The Touch of Earth is due to the baking of the atom ;
and in the products it is due to the touch produced ia the atom.
The touch of Air on the other hand is nut due to any baking; and
it is this that constituted the difference between the touch of the
two Substances; and the fact of the Touch of Air being neither
warm nor cool differentiates thai Touch from the Touch of
Water and Fires*
The existence of Totfch in Air is pointed out by the süträ —
' Air has Touch,' in the second Adkyäya. Then again, we have
a aüträ pointing out that the substances devoid of colour hav©
fcheir number &c. invisible; and this indicates the existence
in Air of the seven qualities beginning with 'Number/ For if
auch existence were not meant to be indciated, then the mere
mention of such invisible qualities would be useless. Then we
have the süträ that the shaking of grass ia due to the contact
of Ait',—wnicfa shows that there is Faculty, (i. e. of velocity or
speed) irr Air; fat the conjunction of a Substance without speed
is never found to gisre rise to* any action.
' Thcct Air*—the word! 'That' (sa) points to something
spoken" of before and subsequently recalled to the mind—after
which it comes to be referred to by ' this,' 'at/dm ' The particle
' ca' indicate» that it is not Earth, Water and #rre only that
are of two kinds, but Air" also.
The Airy Product is found in the shape of the Body, the
Sense-organ^ the Object and the 8reath. Oftfreae, the author
poi&toottt the Body in its generic form:~^Tfre &rt$ body is such
as itf never born of the womb; and it iar notf lifeefcfrfcEarth-body,
w>hich is boSh1 w^mbi-born andaow-wouib-bom Tb^ region where
these Airy bodies are found i« thafc of the Marufs. The Airy
body bed© 1»«w eapaMe of experiences, by reaaton of the admix-

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Air.

103

ture.of Earth-particles which, coming into contact with the Air |
molecules, teuds to solidify them into a conglomerate whole.
The »Sense-organ is that which leads to the experiencing of
Touch by all living beings ;. and this organ is made of Air-molecules, independently of all contact with Earth-particles ; and
thus being produced in a manner peculiar to itself, different
from tluit of the rest of the Body, it becomes an organ of perception The existence of this organ is known from the feeling of
Touch that we have. And the fact of its being Airy is proved by
the fact of its manifesting Touch alone from among the qualities
of colour &c.—e. g. we find iu the case of the Air that renders
perceptible coolness of the water on our body. This organ exists
all over the body, as is shown by the fact of touch being felt
aFI over the body. The organ is called 'Tvatc ( 'skin') as it is
found to exist in the skin, the name of the container being
applied to tho contained.
To this name some people object as follows : " The Bodily
position of all sense-organs is found to be pervaded over by skin; •
for as a matter of fact we find that where there is skin there alone
are colour &c. perceived, and not otherwise; and hence the
name of 'skin' should apply to all the organs, and not to the
organ of Touch alone."
This is not right; as in that case no blindness &c. would be
possible; and then, if you were to admit of a diversity of potencies
as due to the particular substratum of each, apart from the
common element of the skin, the blindness being held to be a
cessatiou of that potency, then that would amount to ao admission of a diversity of the sense-organs themselves*.
The Airy object ie that wbich ig the substratum of the
feeling of Touch perceived by us. The existence of the object is.
proved by Senae-pereeption.
Page 46.] As an.eaaraple of thin senae-perception some people
point to the direct cognitioa» thett we have through the tactile
orga-n, of the blowing of Air. Buit «h*t ie aofe sight, as in alldirect perception that we have through the Tactile organ, it id

104

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (4.)

only Touch that is felt, and nothing else. As fur the cognition
of the blowing of 4 irt it is got at by means of Inference, which
through the force of habit, appears even in the absence of any
remembrance of Invariable Concomitance and other factors
necessary in the Inferential process; just we perceive apparently
by the eye (though really infer) the shaking of trees &c. In the
perception of the difference in the feeling of coolness and warmth,
the recognition of Air that we have proceeds from an Inferential
process which leads to a recognition of the Substance (Air) that
brings up the Substratum of the Touch in question ; and as for
the Tactile organ, that cannot give us any idea except that of the
feelings of coolness and warmth. The Inferential reasoning —
that 'Air' is perceptible by Touch, because it is-the substratum
of the Touch that is perceived, like the jar'—is set aside by the
actual non-perception of the Air; just like the Inference that
'the hare has horns because it is an animal* As a matter of fact,
we find, in the case of such suInstances as the jar and the like,
that all cases of the tactile perceptibility of substances are cases
also of visual perceptibility; and we also find that Air is not
visible to the eye; consequently from this we could safely infer
th« absence of tactile perceptibility in it.
The non-perceptibility of Air having been thus established,
the Author now proceeds to adduce an inferential argument to
prove its existence—Its existence is indicated by &c.t When we
feel a touch without perceiving any colour, or taste &c., we
at once conclude that it must have some substratum of its own,
because it is a touch, like any other touch ; nor could it have
the Earth for its substratum, because it is not accompained by
colour, ^while Earth is never without colour). It might be urged
that even in the case of touch, there exists some colour, though
it is not manifested. But that would not be right; because the
perceived touch of the Earth is invariably found to be accompanied by the perceived colour of that Earth. In the case in
question however, there is no perception of Colour; consequently
the Touch cannot be regarded as belonging to the Earth. Nor
could Water aud Fire be regarded as the necessary substratum;

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES: Air.

105

because the touch frit in the Air is neither hot nor cold, like the
touch of the jar ( while the touch of Water and Fire are distinctly cool and warm). Nor lastly, could the Touch be regarded as
belonging to the incorporeal Substances,—AJcägä, Time and
Space ; because Touch is always found to exist in corporeal substances. Theo, if the touch belonged to the Mind, then like the
atoms, Mind would have the character of producing products
homogenous to itself; as a matter of fact however we find that
Mind has not produced any touch products. Consequently, the
Touch could not belong the Mind. Thus then, the only substance
that could be regarded as the substratum of Touch is Air, and
Air only.
Similarly too, Sound also an is indication of the existence of
of Air. For instance, we often hear of a rustling sound appearing, all on a sudden, among the leaves of trees ; and we conclude
that the sound must be primarily due to the conjuuction of a
substance that is endowed with touch, because it Is an initiative
souud related to a substance whose component particles are not
separate!, like the sound proceeding from the drum struck by a
stick. That which has this Touch is the Air ; as Akdca&nd the
other substances have no Touch. Aud if the sound werewlue to
the coloured substances,—Earth, Water or Fire—then it would
be visible to the Eye. We have added the proviso—'that which
is related to a substance of which the constituent particles are
not separated'—with a view to set aside the sound produced by
disjunction. Similarly, the existence and continuance, of leaves
and other things in the sky must be regarded as due to the conjunction of a substance capable of tactile perception,—because it
is a continuance in the absence of any such impelling agency as
that of effort or speed—just as we find in the case of leaves floating
on the Water. This substance capable of tactile perception cannot be either Earth or Water or Fire ; because the Touch is not
visible. Hence this substance must be regarded as something
totally distinct from these three. We have added the proviso—fin
the absence of effort and speed'—with a view to differentiate the
existence or continuance of the arrow and the bird. -Then again,
8

106

PRACASTAPADA SHASHYA-CHAP. IV. SECTION (,4.)

the peculiarly qualified Shaking of trees must be due to the conjunction of a substance capable ot* being perceived by the organ of
Touch,—because it is a qualified Shaking,—like the shaking
of the vetasa tree caused by the swift current of the river. It
might be argued that the premiss does not apply to the case of
the trembling of the Earth during Earth-quakes. But it is not
Page 4701 s o > a s Earth-quakes are due to a different cause altogether ; and it is only a qualified shaking ( i. e. shaking of substances found to be qualified by the connection of something else)
that can be regarded as a reason for the existence of a conjunction
with a tactile substance.
Objection : " The substance inferred from sound and the
other indications, is the same as that inferred from Touch, and
there is not a distinct substance inferred from each of the indications enumerated ; under the circumstances what are your proofs
for asserting that the existence of Air is indicated by Sound,
Steadiness and Shaking ? "
Reply : The proof for this lies in the fact that, in as much
as Sound, Steadiness and Shaking can be reasonably attributed
to the substance that has been inferred from Touch, there can
be no reason for the assumption of other substances.
The author now points out the property of Air :—It has the
character of moving horizontally. It is capable of moving the
clouds from one place to tht other, of keeping them suspended
and of counteracting the force of their gravity, and also of
making them rain. U is Air again which moves chariots and
boats.
In as much as there is always a doubt as to the singleness
or multiplicity of such inferred substances as the KIcägä and the
like, with a view to remove this doubt in the case of Air, our
author adds—though it is imperceptible &c. He points out
where Collapse " is* perceptible; whenever there is a collision of
two winds operating in opposite directions, they 3top each other's
motion ; and it is this collision tending to deaden their velocity
that is called " collapse." And it is this from which we iufer the

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Air.

107

fact of the wind being many; as there could be no collision,
(which is a kind of conjunction.) of a single thing by itself. la
as much as two winds blowing in the same direction, one after
the other, do not collide,—the text adds—bloiving in different
directions with contrary action. And as there would be no
actual collision between the two if they were of unequal force—
the stronger forcing its way over the weaker and blowing in its
original direction—the author has added; blowing with equal
velocity.
In as much as the conjunction in question would be as
imperceptible as their multiplicity, the text proceeds to show
that the collision too is inferred from the upward going of two
corporeal substances in the shape of the Air rising up, the
process of reasoning bein^ that—the rising of the winds must
be due to their stiking against each other, because it is an upward
motion of substances naturally having a horizontal motion, and
no other cause for such upward motion is possible under the
circumstances, just like the rising of the waves of water
striking against one another. Instead of using the expression
'avayaulnoh1 ('substance made up of certain constituent
parts ), the author has used the expression ' sävayavinoh '
(the things made up of partite substances'), with a view
to include the Air in the gross perceptible form only—the
epithet 'sävayava' ('partite') being applicable to the subtile
constituents of Air (f. i., the diad of Air, which also is made up
of constituent atoms and hence as such can be called '{mvayava '
though it is not perceptible); specially as a substance that is
atomic in its dimensions cannothave the power of moving such
things as the tuft of grass and the like. As the upward rising
of the winds would also be imperceptible, the author adds that
the rising is inferred from tfie rising up of tufts of grass &c.
The author now describes the real form of * Präan' which
is known, by ordinary men aod also in the works on yoga, as
something totally distinct from Air in the shape of ordinary
objects. The Breath exists within the body.—that is to say

108

PRAQASTAPÄDA 3HASHYA—CHAP. V.

c

Breath ' is the name that is given to the Air in the body. The
useful purpo3^ served by this Breath is that it moves about the
liquid and solid rriditerials, as also the refuse substances of the
body. By the word 'liquid' here is meant the particular substance that is produced out of the digested food ; 'refuse' refers
to the excreta; 'solid' refers to the skin, the flesh, the boues
Page 48 ] and the blood &c. These substances are moved about
and brought together—by the Breath. There may be a doubt
as to the multiplicity of this Breach ; hence it is added—while
being one &c. Ik might be urged that we have many scriptural
passages speaking of the Air in the Body being five in uumber
with a view to this our author add;—By reasons of the diverse functions &c. The Air is called 'apana* ('downward');
by reason of its moving down ehe refuse materials of the body ;
when
it expands the liquids among the arteries it is called
1
vydna* ('expansive'); by raising up the foods and drinks it
comes to be called 'uaHna' ('upward'); and that which is
breathed out of the nostrils and the mouth is called ' Präna *
(' outward') ; aud which distributes equally the stomachtic heat
over all parts of the stomach, for purposes of digestion is called
'Samana' ('equalising'). Thus we find that we have got five
distinct Airs; but the number 'five' is only assumed (on the
basis of its different functions) we conclude this from the fact of
the impossibility of many corporeal substances existing in a
single substrate (i. e. the five Airs could not inhere over the
whole of a single Body.
CHAPTER V.
O F THE Mahäbhütas OR THE ULTIMATE MATERIAL
SUBSTANCES OR STATES OF MATTER.

Text (Ifi): We are now going to describe the process of the
creation aud destruction of the four ultimate
Maternal Substances»
When a hundred years, by the measure of Brahma
are at an end, there comes the time for the delive-

MAHÄBHUTAS : PROCESS OF CREATION".

109

ranee of the Brahma existing at that time; and
then, for the sake of the resting at night, of all
' living beings wearied by their wanderings' there
arises in the mind of the Supreme Lord, the
Rider of all worlds, a desire to reabsorb (all
creation); and simultaneously with this desire,
there comes about a cessation of the operations of
the unseen potential tendencies of all souls that are
the causes of their bodies, sense-organs and grosselements. Then out of the supreme Lord's desire
and from the conjunction of the souls and the_
material atoms, there come about certain disruptions of the atoms constituting the Bodies and
sense-organs. These disruptions destroy the
combinations of those atoms; and this brings
about the] destrugtion of all things down to the
atoms. (II—i—18, 19 ; V—ii—-1 ; VII—ii 10).
Then there corner about a successive destruction or
reabsorption of the ultimate Material Substances,
Earth, Water, Fire and Air, one after the other,
(V-ii-1, 12; VII-ii-10.)
After this, the atoms remain by themselves in
their isolated condition; and simultaneously
with these there remain the souls permeated
with the potencies of their past virtues and
vices.
Then again, for the sake of the experiences to be
gained by living beings, there arising in the
mind of the supreme Loud a desire for creation,
there are produced, in the atoms of air, certain
actions or motions, due to their conjunctions
under the influence of the unseen potential tendeneies that begin to operate in all souls. These
motions bringing about the mutual' contact of
the air atoms, there appears, through the Diad,

HO

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHASHYA—CHAP. Y.
Triad äco. ßnally die ' Great Air" which exists
vibrating in the shy. (V-ii-12 ; VII-ii-9 ; X-ii-2.)
Page 49 ] After this, in this Great Air, there
appears, in the same order, out of the atoms of
water, the Great Reservoir of ivater, which
remains there surging. (X-ii-2 ; VIl-ii-9.)
In this Reservoir of Water, there appears, out of
the Earth-atoms, the Great Earth which rests there
in its solid form. (V-ii-1; X-ii-2 ; VII-ii-9.)
Thenf in the same Water-reservoir, there appears,
in the same order, out of the Fire-atoms, the Great
Mass of Fire ; and not being suppressed by any
thing else, it stands shining radiantly.
The four gross elements having thus been broughtWo existence, there is produced, from the mere
thought {mental picturing) of the Supreme Lord,
the Great Egg, from out of the Fire-atoms mixed
up with the atoms of Earth ; and in this egg having produced all the worlds and the Four-faced
Brahma, the Grand-father of all creatures) the
Supreme Lord assigns to him the duty of producing the various creatures. Being thus engaged by
the Supreme Lord, Brahma, endoxoed with extreme
degrees of Knowledge, Dispaisiov and Power,
having recognised the ripeness for fruition of the
Karmic tendencies of the living beings, creates^
out of his mind, his sons, the Präjäpalis, as alsothe
Manus and the several groups of the Gods, Rshis
and Pitrs,—and out of hi$ mouth, arms, thighs
and feet, the four castes, and the other living beings of all grades high and loiv,—all these having
their knowledge and experience ordained in
acordance with their previous deeds ; and then
he connects them with Virtue, Knowltdge, Dispas-

MAHÄBHCTAS : PROCESS OF CREATION.
sion and Poivers, according to their respective
impressional potencies.
Commentary.
Having explained in detail, the fact of the four ultimate elements being products, the author now proceeds to consider the
question of their having a Creator.
Page 50.] We have got to consider the production and
destruction of the four elements, Earth and the rest; if we were
to consider these separately under the section dealing with each
of them, there would be an unnecessary prolonging of our work ;
consequently our author takes them collectively in this section;
specially as the facts apply to all of them equally.
We noiv proceed to describe the processes of <£c. Though
the creation and destruction of all these four is described
collectively, yet this should ooü be regarded as a point of
similarity among them; as the production and destruction
of each is found to be described as distinct from those of
another.
If we had only the word ' Mahäfyhütänäm' (f of the gross
elements'), then that would apply to the three gross elements
only, as in accordance with the Kapinjalanyäya (videMimänsä8ütra Adh xi-i-38 &c), the plurality (in ' Mahäbhütänäm')
would indicate ' three ' only. In order, therefore, to include ail
the four elements, we have the word 'Caturndm'
Then again, if we had one word ' Caturnwi' only, then
that would apply to the four ' Air'-products just mentioned—
viz: the Airy Body, the Airy Organ, the Airy Object and
Breath ; hence with a view to preclude these we have the word
'MahäbhütänämJ
Objection :—" In that case, as the production and destruction described are of the four gross-elements, alone, the
process would not apply to the production and destruction of
the Diads, as these are atomic in their nature (and not groes.) "

112

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHASH\rA-CHAP. V.

Reply :—Not so ; as we have the word (' vidhi ' ' process');
the sense of our author being that ho is going to. describe the
process by which the elements are produced and destroyed;
and we know that this process begins with the production of the
Diads, and ends with the atoms ; and so this would necessarily
include the production and destruction of the Diads also.
As what the author has in view is*the description of the
.two processes, irrespective of the order in which they are dealt
with, he begins with the process of destruction first, though
this has been referred to last.
By the measure of Brahma <kc.
5 Nimeshas (Twinkling of
1 Käshtkä.
our eyes)
30 Kästhäs
1 Kalä.
1 Nädikcb.
15 Raids
1 Muhicrta.
30 Kaläs
30 Muhüitas
1 Ahordtra (day & night.)
15 Ahorätras
1 Pakuha (Fort-night.)
2 Pakshas
1 Mäsa (Month.)
2 Mäsas
1 RtiL (Season.)
1 Samvatsara (Year.)
6 Rtus or 12 Mäsas
1 Day of the Gods.
3 Rtus or I Uttarclyana
3 Rtus or 1 Dakshinäyana 1 Night of the Gods.
360 Days and nights of the Gods
or 360 of our years
.. 1 Year of the Gods.
1200 Years of the Gods
... The Four Yugas,
1000 Four Yugas
... 1 Day ol' Brahma.
Page 51J After the lapse of a hundred years—each year made
up of 360 such days of Brahma—there conies the time for the
final deliverance of the Brahma of the time; and then there arises,
in the mind of the Supreme Lord of all worlds whose powers are
never repressed, a desire for the re-absorption, for purposes of

MAHÄBHÜTAS : PROCESS OP CREATION.

H3

allowing them during the night a little rest frora rretempsychic
troubles, of ail living beings, who, during the cycle coming to
an end, have been undergoing ceaseless troubles attendant upon
birth and death.
Immediately after this, there comes about a cessation of
the functioning^ of the unseen potential tendencies inhering
iu all the Souls, which tendencies are the productive cause of
.the body, sense-organ and gross elements (related to each Soul).
On this cessation, there remains no chance for the production,
of any further body &c. And as for those that have already
appeared, for the destruction of these, there appear certain
actions or motions, out of the Supreme Lord's destructive wish
and from the conjunctions of the Souls and atoms. From these
actions there comes about a disruption of the atoms that form
the direct or indirect material causes of the Bodies and the
Sense-organs. This disruption leads to the destruction of the
conjunötioQ of these atoms ; and thus there comes about the destruction of the Body and all other Gross Substances, all these
body &c., becoming destroyed down to the diads, the atoms
alone being left behind.
"If the created things were destroyed suddenly, then the
God would be known as * merciless' and ' doing things without
any motive V—In order to guard against this our Author adds
that all this process of destruction and re-absorption is for the
purpose of allowing the beings a rest at night, as it were.
Some people urge the following objection : ** There being
"endless Karmic tendencies of an endless number of Souls these
"tendencies would operate one afcer the other ( and not all at
"once); consequently while some souls would be desisting from
"all experiences on account of their Karmic teudeocies having
"ail become spent up in fruition) others would be still under-going their experiences, and others still would only be turning fco"wards future experiences; and thus the objects of experience
"functioning on all sides, there could not be any simultaneous
"cessation of the bodies and sense-organs &c."

114

PRApASTAPÄDA BHA3AYA—CHAP. V.

This objection is met by the declaration that there is a
cessation of the operations of the Karmic tendencies.
The time of the final deliverance of Brahma, has been
figuratively spoken of as ' night' because of that time ressembüng
the night in the point of the cessation of the experieuces and perceptions of ail living beinga (who go to sleep at night, and also
into a long sleep of unconsciousness at the time under
consideration).
The Gross-Elements also become destroyed in the same
manner. That is to say, just as there is a destruction of bodies
and sense-organs, down to the very atoms, so in the same manner, we have the destruction of the Gross Elements also». That
is to say, by the process of the action and disruption of the
atoms, there is a successive destruction of the Gross Elements,
one after the other :-—viz : while Water is still existing, the
Earth is destroyed ; aßd Water is destroyed before Fire ; and
this latter is also destroyed before Air.
After this the atoms continue to exist in their isolated
state; and alao the Souls permeated with the faculties or tendencies
left upon them by their previous good and evil deeds, continue to
exist during the same period of time, i. e. during 100 years of
Brahma,, Though Time and Space &c, also exist during this
time—as these also are eternal—yet the author speaks of the
existence of the Souls and atoms alone, as if these did
not exist at the time, then the atoms could not be developed into
the product though the Karmic tendencies of the Souls; as such
it is these that are by far the most important factors deserving
notice.
52.] Having thus described the process of destruction,
the Author proceeds to describe the process of creation : Then
again &c. Though during that time the Souls are not endowed
with life, yet they have been spoken of äs ' Pränis ' (' living
beings,') because of their capability for being endowed with it.
There arises, in the mind of the Supreme Lord, a desire to

MAHÄBHÜTAS : PROCESS OF CREÄ.TION.

H5

bring about the creation, for the purpose of bringing about the
experiences of pleasure and pain by those Souls. Then the
Karraic tendencies of the Souls regain their operative powers.
Though the creative desire of the Supreme Lord, in the
shape of an active potency, ia one only, and eternal, functioning
towards the appearance of numberless effects that are simultaneously brought into existence,—yet, at one time it tends to
bring about destruction, and at another creation, on account of
the differences in the nature of the particular time and other
auxiiliary circumstances. At the time that it tends towards
destruction, the Karmtc tendencies of the Souls cease in their
operation, and assume a position of indifference (inactivity or
latency). And when it tends towards creation, the tendencies
regain their activity towards the bringing about of their effects.
The compound * Vrttilabdkäh ' is to be explained as, 'Vrttih labdkayaih te* ('those by whom activity has been regained',)
This compound is found mentioned along with such compounds
as ' ähitägni' &c, with regard to which the position of the two
constituent words is laid down to be optional; (Panini IT-ii-37)
just as we have the compound ' danfajata *; consequently no
objection can be,taken to the order of the two words in the
compound.
Thus then the meaning is that there appear certain actions or
motions in the air-atotns, on account of the conjunctions of these
atoms with Souls, brought about by the active Karmic tendencies
inhering in these latter. Thus in the appearance of the action
in the Air-atoms, the air-atoms are the material cause; the
conjunctions of the atoms with Souls whose Karmic tendencies
have begun to be active, constitute the immaterial cause; and the
Karmic tendency is the instrumental cause.
These actious bring about the mutual conjunction of the
air-atoms. From these conjunctions, the Air-diads appear; then
the Triads, and so on up to the Gross-Air, which exists vibrating in the sky, not having its speed interrupted in any way.

PBA£ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. V.
Then, in this Air, there appears the Great Reservoir of
Water, produced, in the same manner as above, out of the
Water-atoms, through the Diad, ia the same order of triad &c.
and this remains surging, flowing over the whole universe, not
being stopped anywhere.
After the production of this greafc Water-reservoir, in this
same Reservoir, there appears the Solid Earth, out of the Earthatoms.
Then in this Water-reservoir, appears the Great Mass of
Fire, produced, in the same manner as described above, out of
the Fire-atoms; and not being suppressed by anything else,
this-mass of fire remains shining radiantly.
Though there is a natural opposition between Fire and
Water, yet it is on'account of the force of the unseen agency .
that it becomes possible for one to be the substratum of the
other.
Thus the four Great Material Substances having been produced in aforesaid manner, there appears, by reason of mere
volition or contemplation on the part of the Supreme Lord, out
of the atoms of Fire mixed up with the atoms of Earth, the
Great Egg. It is because this Egg contained particles of Earth,
that it could not appear as a Mass of pure fire.
Page 53.] In this Egg, the Supreme Lord produces the four
faced Brahma, the primeval ancestor of all people (and regions),
along with the several worlds; and assigns to him the duty of
producing the creature«. Being thus appointed by the Supreme
Lord, Brahma, endowed with extreme degrees of Knowledge,
Dispassion and Powers, comes to recognise, by means of his
knowledge, the Virtues and the ¥ices of all beings; and oa
account of his Dispassion he does not act with any partiality;
aucj^brough his Great Power, he makes them experience the
results of their deeds.
Hairing come to know the fruition of the deeds of living
beings. Having oorae to know that such ai*d such should be

MAHÄBHÜTAS : PROCESS OP CREATION".

H7

the results of their previous deeds, Brahmfi produces his mental
sons, Daksha and the rest, whose knowledge, experiences and
lives are in accordance with their previous deeds—c mind-bora
sons J because produced out of mere volition,—and also the Manus,
the Gods, and the Rshis, and the hosts of Pitrs; and then out
oi his mouth, arms, thighs and feet, he produces respectively,
the Brähmana, the Ksbätriya, the Yaicja and the £fidra ; and
then the other beings, high and low. He connects all these with
such duties (Dfiarma), Knowledge, Dispassion anil Power, as are
indue accord with their previous deeds. [The word ~ A caya'
means 'a<file\ that ivhick lies latent in the self, until the
experiencing of the result]. He does not deviate one jot from
this universal law.
Some people have asserted that the action of an intelligent
agent is always for accomplishing some desirable end (to be
served by that action), or for the removable of something that
is undesirable ; and as none of these motives—either of obtaining something desirable, or of avoiding something undesirable—
could apply to the case of the Lord who has all his desires fulfilled, it cannot be possible for Him to act in any way towards
the creation of the world.
To this we make the following reply: It is for bringing
about the experiences of all living beings <&c. That is to say,
the action of the Lord towards creation is for the sake of others,
and not for the fulfilment of any desires of his own.
Objection: "In that case He should have created the
world abounding in pleasure alone, and not one mixed with
pain; as the Lord would be move.d to create by pure mercy/*
The reply to this is as follows: He recognises the fruits of
the deeds of living beings. That is to say, though He is moved
to act for the sake of others, yet He does not create a world
of pleasures alone ; as His creative operation is regulated by the
variegated Karmic tendencies of living beings. Nor is this incompatible with His mercifulness; as pain serves the Man's

118

PRAQASTAPÄAD BHÄSHYA—CHAP. Y.

useful purpose of producing in his mind a non-attachment to
the things of the world. Nor is the fact of His acting in accordance with the previous good and bad deecjs of beings incompatable with his independent and Supreme Godly character; because it is He that joins them to such * duties, knowledge, dispassion and power' as are in due accord with their own Karmic
tendencies. That is to say, how could He cease to be the
Supreme Lord, by awarding to each being results in accordance
with his respective deeds ? For certainly, the master does not
cease to be a master by making awards to his servants in
accordance with their merits.
Page 54-] To this process of creation the following objection
is raised ; "At the beginning of creation, the living beings would
not know the meaning af any words, as DO convention (on which
the denotations of words are based) could have been fixed upon
till then; and hence at that time there could be no use or
words,"
The basis for meeting this objection is supplied by the
text: "Mental Sons &c" It is the soul with a body born of
the womb that, on account of the great pains suffered in the
womb, loses'all memory of previous experiences; The Ilsbis, the
Prajäpatis and the Manus, on the other haod, being produced
from the mind, have such bodies as are not born of the womb ;
and as such there being no reason for their losing their memories, they are found to be directly connected with their Karmic
, tendencies, and duly endowed with the reminiscenses of previous
experiences; and hence these Beings recall all their verbal U3age
of the previous creation; juut as a man after sleep remembers
things seen before he went to sleep; and having recalled these
words, these Beings carry on the usage among themselves ; and
from this usage, the living beings ofthat cycle come to know the
meanings of those words ; and these on their turn carry on the
usage, and hand it on to future generations.
Question : " What are the proofs for the existence of God?"

MAHÄBHOTAS : PROCESS OF CREATION.

119

This proof is in the form of Scriptural Authority and
Inferential Reasoning.
This Inferential Reasoning is—The four Great Elementary
Substances are preceded by 3ome one having a knowledge of
them, because they are effects,—anything that is an effect in
preceded by one having a cognition of it, as for instance, the
jar (which is always preceded by the potter),—and the four Great
Elementary Substances are effects,—hence they must be preceded by oae hiving a knowledge of them.
Objection : " The premiss of this inference (that the Elementary Substances are effects) is not duly cognised by any
means of right motion,—f. i. the fact of the Earth being an effect
cannot be regarded as duly established/'
Reply : This is not right; as the Earth &c. are made up
of parts; and everything that has parts is an effect, as for
instance the jar; the Earth &c. have parts,—hence they must \)e
effects. Objection:—"An Inferential Reasoning is operative only when
"the invariable Concomitance (upon which it is based) has been
"duly recognised; as for the invariable concomitance of the character of an effect and that of being preceded by one having know"ledge of it, this can never be known from the case of the jar and such
"other substances ; as in the case of the sprouting of the seed we
"find that the sprouting appears at the same time as the cognition
"of the sprout by the persou who had sown the seed ; and hence in
"thiscase we do not find any precede nee of the doer with the knowledge of the effect over the appearance of the effect. Nor could
"the sprout &c. be included in the subject of the inference in question; as it is only after the invariable concomitance has been duly
"cognised, and the Inference has begun to operate, that we proceed to distinguish the Subject and Predicate &c. of the Inference,
"for the benefit of the opponent; while in the case in question
"(of the sprout) it is found to be always included in a cognition
"contrary to the concomitance ; and as such, there could be no
"cognition of the necessary concomitance."

120

PRA$ASTAPAPAD BHÄSHYÄ—CHAP. V.

Reply: If there be no recognition of the invariable concomitauce simply on account of there being no perception of
duality or difference (between the time of the appearance of
the sprout and the knowledge thereof by the sower),—then, in
that case, we could never rightly arrive at the Sämänyatodrskta
inference of the moving of the sun, which has been put forward
by the author of the Bkäshya on the Mlmänsd-Sütraa. As
therein also, we find that it is merely the fact of the stars &c.
having assumed different positions, and not that of their having
moved, that is perceived at the same time as the cognition of their
other positions preceded by the movcienfc of Devadatta (the
observer) from one place to another.
Objection : "In the case of the stars, in as much as the
"non-perception of moving could be possible on account of the
"difference in the position (or the great difference in space) be"tAveen the observer and the stars, or the cüffererice *a their
"positions, (the one being on the Earth while the others are in
"the sky),—this non-perception, could not set aside the effect of
"the repeated seeing of the sun, which is unconditionally effective
"towards bringing about a cognition of the necessary concomitances; specially as the two do not pertain to the same subject."
Reply: In that case, in the case in question also, the nonperception of the cognition of the sprout (before its actual
appearance) may be due to the difference in nature between
that and the doer (the Sower), who is bodiless (while the sprout
is bodied); and hence the affectiveness of the repeated perceptions operating unconditionally could not be set aside by the
said non-perception.
Page 55] Objection: "Then again, does theafyoveInferential Reasoning establish only the Creator, or a Creator capable of
"creating the Earth &c. ? If it prove a mere creator, then what
"is desired is not accomplished. As what you seek to prove is not
"a mere agent, like ourselves; as any such person having a limited
"vision could not create the Earth &c. Then as for an agent

SPECTAL SUBSTANCES: Proce^ of Creation.

121

"capable of creating the earth <&c:, such a one cannot be
"proved to exist,—as there cuuld be no (cognisable) concomitance
"with such a one; and through concomitance too, we could only
"prove thu existence of an agent similar in nature to the one
"perceived in the case brought forward as the corroborative
"instance."
Reply: Tais objection does not apply to the case; as what
the Inference is sought to prove is not any particular kind of
creator. All that the premiss put forward proves is the fact of the
Substances under consideration being preceded by an intelligent
being in general; and this necessarily establishes his particular
character in the shape of the capability of creating the Earth
&c.—as the existence of no general entity can be proved without
the accompaniment of a particular characteristic.
Objection: " Let the existence of the general entity Be
not established ; what of that ? ; '
Reply : Not so ; because the concomitance of the general
entity is not set aside along with its causedness. If an Inference
did not establish that which is invariably concomitant with the
Reason or Probans, then the sight of smoke too would not prove
the existence of Fire in general; as in this case too the existence
would not be established of the particular Fire, which has not
yet been perceived to be in any way related to the smoke seen :
and no Universal Essence of Fire could have an existence apart
from a particular Fire.
Objection: "An Inferential Reasoning has tWo factors—oriö
"consisting of the recognition of invariable concomitance between
"the Probandwm and the Probans ( the Major Premiss); and
"anotherinthecognitionof therelationshipbetweentheSubjectand
"the Probansor middle term (the minor Premiss); and the Majot
"Premiss establishes the existence of the generality, and the
"Minor Premiss establishes that of the particular, in the form of
"the Fire loc ited in the mountain (where from thesmoke is seen
"a issuing). If it were not so, wherein would lie the use of the'
9

122

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA DHÄSHYA-CHAP. IV. SECTIONf (5).

"Minor Premiss? And where could be the validity of that
"Inference which applies to something that h.is beeil previously
"cognised ? "
Reply: If such bo the eise, then, the same may be sa'ul
with regard to the inference of God'* existence also. As apart
from 'attachment' all other characteresiics of the 'Aclor'in
general are present in God als»).*
The objector's standpoint may he thus summed up: "An
"Inference establishes the exis^nce of a particular entity also,
"when there 13 no means of right knowledge pointing to the
"contrary; as for iustance, in the case of the Sm<>ke and Fire, we
"find no incongruity in the inference, from smoke, of the particular fire located iu the mountain side; specially as we often
"find the individual particulars (ofgeneralities) occupying differe n t points in space and time. In the case of the inference of God
"however, we cannot have any individual particular proved, as we
"have means of right knowledge pointing to the contrary. For instance, the inference cannot prove the fact of the effects (Earth
"&c.) being preceded by a Body (of the God) ; because if there
"be a body, it would necessarily contain the Sins<-?-organs ; and
"having these organs, the God could not have any knowledge o[
"the material causes (atoms), the accessories (in the shape of the
"Karmic tendencies of Souls) and the potencies of various instrumentalities—all of which are supersensuons,—in the matter
tf
oi the creation of Earth &c. ; and as such Pie could not be the
"creator oi these. Then as for the creation not being preceded
"by a Body (of God), ifc is absolutely impossible to prove this; be"cause, as a matter of fact, we find that what a doer (of any act)
"does is—1) to ascertain the power or capability of the instru''ments, (2) to desire to fulfil the particiilar act; by means of
"those instruments, (3) to put forth an effort, (4) to put the
"body into action, (5) to supervise over the various causes
• Thia sentence as ifc stands in the printed text is not intelligible ; Nor has
the translator any MS. by him ; «<» he hau tmi^l-rited the sentence iu accordance
with the only possible interpretation of which it ww capable.

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Process of Creation.

123

"(material and others), & (6) to do the act ; and if he does not
"ascertain, or desire, or put forth his effort, or put his body into
"action, hedoes not dothe act. And from these affirmative and negative universal instances (of the acting with the ascertaining &c.)
"weconclude that like thelntelligence,(of God) the Body also would
"be a necessary means to the production ofeff<jcts,-as indicated by,
"tliesamemc-ins by whichtheinvariable concomitance is recognised
"after a due recognition of all conditions and limitations ; and hence
"we cannot discard this notion of thenecessity of the previous exis"tence of the Body; just as in the case of the inference from smoke,
''we do not discard the notion 01 the capacity in Fire of being produced out of (or of changing the coudition of) parts. Even with all
"this, if you discard the notion of the existence of the Body, then
"you can as reasonably discard the notion of that of Buddhi
"also. It might be argued that—' God, being possessed of great
''powers, would bring about the creation, even without having a
"body or intelligence for Himself; but He could not do so without
"a knowledge of the nature of the material and accessory causes;
"as no such action is met with in ordinary experience/ But
"in that case my purpose also has become fulfilled ; as mere
"desire not being operative without the intervention of effort, it
"is aot as capable of bringing about effects as the Body which
"operates directly by itself.
Page 56.] " It may be asked—where, in that case, would
"there be room for the general precedence of an intelligent
"creator ?' But as a matter of fact, there could be no room for
"it; as such a- creator could* not rightly be regarded either as
"bodied or bodiless; and the existence of a more 'generality,
'without the specifications (in the shape of corporeality or other"wise), cannot be established. It may be asked—what is the
''flaw in the inferential argument put forward in support ofsuch
"a being ?' We reply that there is no actual flaw ; but the man
"who in the absence of any specific character, would put forward
"an argument to prove the unprovable existeuce of the mere
"generic entity, which, in such a cu.se, would be as much aa ab-

124

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (5).

as the hare's horn/ would stand self-condemned; just
"like a man who would take up a shirp sword to strike at empty
"space. If you should not be satisfied without my showing
"some flaw in your inference, then we would point out that it ia
"open to the fallacy of Kälätyayäpidishia,' in as much as the
"inference of the precedence of a bodiless being is set aside by
"the means whereby the invariable concomitance (of cause and
"effect) is recognised ; and the invariable concomitance thus contradicting the desired character of bodilessness, the Inference
"becomes open to the fallacy of* Vigeskcuvlrndka^ which is only
"a particular from of the fallacy of' Virudha \"
To the above we make the following reply: Does the
nature of the actor necessarily consist in being bodied ? or does
it consist in the character of being the operator of instruments
recognised as capable of bringing about the necessary effects ?
The former alternative could not be accepted ; as in that case a
person in deep sleep, or one who is not doing anything towards
an action, would also have to be regar led as the * actor' (as
even in these conditions he would have his body all the same).
We must then accept the second alternative ; as it ia only when
this character is present) that we find the effect coming about.
This charecter can belong to a bodiless being also ; as we nod in
the case of the Soul (which is an immaterial thing) operating towards the moving of the body. It might be argued that the
body belongs to the soul, who has obtained it through its previous deeds (and as such the operating Soul cannot be regarded
aa strictly bodiless). True, the body belongs to the Soul; but
it is not the body that supplies the force impalling itself;
as any such impulsion by itself would involve a. contradiction.
It may be urged tha,t the body nouy ba regarded aa the means
of impulsion, in as much as it is the object of the impelling.
But in the case of God also we have the atom as the object to
be impelled or operated up:>n.
Objection: " The impelling of the Soul's body is found to
be: brought a bouV by desire and effort; and not when the body

3PECUL SUBSTANCES: Process of Creation.

125

does not exist; and from this we infer that the body is the
means or author o[ its own impelling, through the said desire
and effort/'
Reply: Not so ; as the body can be only accepted as im.
pelling or giving rise to desire and effort (and not to its own
operations). After the desire and effort have been brought
about, and when these begin to operate towards impelling (the
body to a certain course of action), the body ceases to be the-impelling agent; as the body bsing the object of this impelling
could not, at the same time, be its doer. And thus we find that
there is no similarity between the action of the soul and that of
the boJy. Then again, we often meet with cases where certain
inanimate things are moved to action by an intelligent being,
merely through his own desire and effort, independently of all
actions of the body. On the other hand, we never find any action
apart from an intelligent being. AH these facts go to establish
the existence of God.
;:
Objection : " The body would be necessary for the production of desire and effort also."
Reply: The body may be required for the appearance ct
such desire and effort as are adventitious; where however the»€f
are natural, the body would not be necessary. Nor is there any
inconsistency in believing the Intellect, Desire and Effort to be
eternal; as we have seen, in the case of Colour &cT, that they are
of two kinds—eternal and non-eternal; and the same could very
well be the case with Intellect &c, also.
This is the ultimate point at which the discussion with
' regard to the existence of God must rest. We now proceed with
the discussion as to the details of the process (of creation).
Page 57«] Objection ; " The atoms themselves presided over
by the Souls would operate towards creation (and as such1 there
would be no need of an extraneous God.)"
Reply: This cannot be; because the Souls depend for
their cognitions upon the sense-organs obtained in

126

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. IV. SECTION (5).

with their previous deeds ; aud as auch before they have obtained the physical body, they could not have the cognition of any
thing (and hence they could not superintend the operations of
the atoms).
Objection: " The Souls also are endowed with a natural
intelligence pervading over all things (and hence there could
be no absence oi cognition).'*
Reply: If the (cognitive) intelligence of the soul were
natural to it (and remained with it always), then, by what
agency could thia intelligence have been deranged, whereby
when the soul comes to have a body (after birth), he looks
upon all things as wholly new. {H the intelligence oad remained with the soul permanently nothing would be new to it).
Objection: "On account of the disappearance of the
bodily covering (at death), the Intelligence turns inwards into
the soul itself, and does not operate outwards (towards cognitions)."
Reply: In as much as the Intelligence is all-pervading,
it could never cease to be connected with cognisable objects;
and being eternal, its character of illuminating (making cognisable) objects could never cease to exist; and as such what could
be the meauing of the said ' disappearance'. ?
Objection: "What we mean by * disappearance* is the
stopping of the functioning (of Intelligence)."
Reply: If such be the case, then how could the souls
have any cognition of objects ?
Objection: "In certain cases the functioning of the Intelligence does not cease (and iu these cases the Soul would have
the cognitions)."
Reply: Whence this diversity.?
Objection : " It is due to the peculiarities of the proximity
of sense-organs."

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Process of Creation.

127

Reply : In that case, the functioning of Intelligence towards objects of cognition would be dependent upon the senseorgans, and would not be brought bot bayu mere proximity of
the object to the Intelligence. Then again, as even though
the Intelligence is all-p^rvadin^, yet it is not found to operate
upon (make cognisable) ail things in the world,—and as if all
cognitions were brought about by the Intelligence independently
by itself, there would be no use for the sense-organs,—it is only
reasonable to hold that the Souls, so long as they have no bodies,
do not h ive the cognitions of objects. In support of this, we
hav^ the declaration : 'The self-born One sent forth the senses
outwards, hence it is that one perceives the outside and not the
inside.' [Katkopan.ish.at. IV—i.] And not having any cognitions,
the Souls could not be the superintended or controllers of the
seoseorgans; consequently it is necessary to assume a certain
controller above these S >uls, who would have the character of the
Creator, an i who would be omniscient and full of pure inherent
knowledge ; specially as no operatiuu of non-intelligent things
could be possible without the agency of an intelligent controller.
We are now going to explain whether this controller is one
or many. If there were m\ny of them, then, if they were
not omniscient, they would be as powerless as ourselves; and
if all of them were omniscieut, then in as much as one such
omniscient controller would be enough for all purposes, there
would be no use for the others. Nor would there be any cause
for a constant unanimity among many persons, all of whom
would i>e equally independent and important; and this wmt of
unanimity would, at times, infcerf re with the production of the
desired effect. If all of them were to act in accordance with the
wish of any one of them, then the character of the Lord would
belong to this one, an I not to the others, as we titid in the case of
a number o( persons acting as trustees of a temple, that, in as
much as there is a unanimity of purpose among them with a
view to their business, each of them is not regarded as the 'Lord'
or 'Master.'

138

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (5).

Thus then the Creator,—whose existence has been proved
by the peculiar character of his creafcious,—being omniscient,
He could not be without specific oognitioa with regard to auy
object. Aad hence he could have no misconception (false knowledge), which is always due to the non-recognition of the peculiarities of objects. There being no misconception, He would
have no attachment or aversion, both of which proceed from
misconception (Ignorance). In the absence of attachment and
aversion, He would have no activity, which proceeds from these;
and as such He would have no virtue or vice, which are produced
by actions. There being no virtue and vice, tb^re would be no
pleasure and pain, which proceed from virtue and vice respectively. And as He would always be directly perceiving all
things, He could never have mere memories or Impressions ; and
hence the Supreme Lord is held to possess only eight qualities.
-:
Such is the opinion of some people. Others however hold
that to God belongs pure and unimpeded Intelligence alone,
which constitutes His creative power; and these people do not
admit of the existence in Him of Desire aud Effort; and so
according to them God has only six qualities.
Page 58.] Is this God also bound (like the other Souls), or is
He free ? He cannot be bound ; as he is without klesha and
other things, which are the causes of being bound, and which
are reeled 'BandhanoL ('Bondage'). Nor could He be regarded
as fr€e.; as * liberation ' is synonymous with the removal
of bondage (and as such could not belong to one who has bad no
bondage). He may however be regarded as 'ever free',—as has
been declared by the revered Patanjali: * God is the particular
person who is untouched by troubles, actions with their fruitions
and residua' [ Yoyasutras. I—24]
SECTION (6).
Aici.^A.
Text (4-1)—Jtcdga, Time and Space, having no l&u&r

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES: Akö$a.

129

species, these are three technical names given to
the individuals themselves. XI-i-27, 20-31.
Of ÄMca the qualities are—Sound, Number, Dimension
Seprateness, Conjunction and Disjunction.,
VII-1-22.
Sound cannot be the property of those substances that
can be touched.—(\) because, being perceptible,
its production is not preceded by any quality in
the material cause of the substance (to which it
belongs); (2) because it does not pervade over,
and is not coeval with, the substance to which it
belongs; (o) because it is perceived elsewhere
than in the substratum wherein it i* produced.
1 cannot be regarded as belonging to the Soul,
because it is perceptible by an eaternal senseorgan; (2) because it is perceived by other souls ;
(3) because it is not found to inhere in the soul;
and (4) bemuse it is perceived as apart from all
idea of ' 1! It 'cannot be the quality of Space,
Tim*, and Mind, {!) because it is perceptible by
the Ear, and (2) because it is a i Vigeshaguwa'
(a specific quality). And thus the only substance
to which it coull btlong at a quality, and be a
distinguishing feature of, is Ah'tr.a. (U-i-2 4 to 27 J.
As the distinguishing feature of sound is common to all
Äkd^a, this is regarded as one only. II-i-30,29.
From this unity follows its individual separateness
or isolation. II-i-31.
Ähdca being spoken of as ' vibhu'(omnipresent or aVpirvading), it points to its Dimension being
the larged or highest. VII-i-22.
In as much as Äkdca is spoken of as the cause of sound,
it follows that it has Conjunction, and Disjunction. II-i-31.

130

PRACASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAi». IV. SECTION (6.)

Tktu then, be in'; endowed with qualities, a ad not being
located in any thing else, it is regarded as a
subsfcmce. And in as much as it has no cause,
either homogenous or heterogenous, it is eternal.
II-i-18.
Pag6 5 9 ] In the shape of tfie Auditory senw-organ it is the
cause of the pzrceiving of sound, by all living
beings. The Auditory sense-organ again is the
name given to that part of the Äkdca loliich is calltd
the * Cavity of the Ear'; it is aided by the virtue
and vice (of souls) that bring about the experiencing of sound. This sense-organ being eternal
(as a portion of dlciga), deafness is caused by
a derangement of its accessories. II-ii-21.
Commentary.
For the sake of brevity, the author points out, in a single
place, the differentiating qualities of Äkäci, Time and Space.
Each of these being one only, there are no lower genuses of these;
as a g^nus always resides iu a number of individuals, and there
being no lower genus, the names,—' Äkä;a/ 'Time' and ' Sp ice'—
must be regarded as merely c mveutional, and not as based upon
any geuuses, like the name ' Earth' &3. That is to say, these
names also are mere differentiating qualities. That name is
called ' conventional' (or' technical'), which without any re ison,
is agreed upon as applying to a certain tiling- pointed out from
among a number of things,—»& g. ' this is Devaiatti'; on the
other band, that uame is called ' naimittilca' which is agreed
upon on the basis of a certain reason.
The author next proceed* to take each of these separately.
Among these three, Kfcdca has the distinguishing feature of
having the qualities of Sound &c.
Objection: "What proof is there for the existence o£ dffc ~ca ?
Some people urge that it is Perception; as is evinced by the
fact of our having an idea through the eye, o£ allying bird

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Akd$a.
being at a certain point, and nob at another. But this « notf
correct; as a substance which (like £kaga) is devoid of form and
colour cannot he anieuable to visual perception, and as for the
idea, in the case of the flying bird, of the substratum or place
in the sky at which the bird is seen, this substratum appears
to be nothing else besides the extended field of light."
In view of this the Author proceeds to show that Sound
cannot be the properly of any other substance,—thereby seeking
to establish the existence of Äkäca, by a Paricevha-Inference.
(1) Sound is not preceded by (an outcome of) any quality
in the materi il cause of its substratum; as like the colour of
the cloth &c. it appears after its substratum has been produced.
(2) Then again, like pleasure &c, it cannot be a specific
quality of such things as can be touched. Nor should one
think that this negativing of the fact of Sound being a specific
quality of such things indicates that it is %ge)ieric or ordina/ry
property of these. As S^und is a quality which, alike in its
specific and generic forms, is perceptible by a single external
sense-orgrtn; and hence, like colour and the rest, it is only a
specific quality (and hence the negativing of specific sound
means the preclusion of all sound). The Colour and other
qunlities of the atoms of earth &c. are the specific qualities
of such substances as can be touched; and they are such as are
not preceded by any quality in the material cause of their
substratum ; for the simple reason that atoms (which are their
substratum) are not caused entities ; hence in order to preclude
these colour &c, (which are not perceptible^, our author has
the qualification added * while being perceptible ' to Sound.
(3) Then again, Sound is not coeval with the substance
in which it is produced; as for lusfcauce, we find that the
conch still exists though the sound produced in it has long
disappeared. For this reason too, like pleasure, etc. it cannot be
the specific quality of things that can be touched. Herein
also, the same being the case with the colour of tHe Earth-atom

PRA.$A3TAPÄD\ BHÄSHFA.—CHAP. IV. SECTION (8).
which, even while the atom still exists, is destroyed by contact
with tire,—and as such the argument being found to be defective,
as being too wide, we must connect with this also, the words
'while being perceptible' (which qualification includes the colour
of the atom).
Page 60.] (4). Another reason is put forward—-4s it isperceived
elsewhere than in its substratum. If Sound were the quality of
thingg that can be touched, then We should have to speak of the
Conch and such other things as its Substratum; and the sound
proceeding from the conch is perceived elsewhere than in tbese
things—i. e. in the drum of the Ear; and because as a rule the
\ Quality of one thing could not be perceived apirt from it, we
cannot regard Sound as the quality of any such substance.',
Objection : " The sound that is perceived is in the same
placö as the conch, and (the perception is marie possible by the
fact that) the sense-organ pervades all over the world."
Reply : This can not be ; for if it were so then the sound
near us, as well as that at a distance from us, would be perceived
equally well.
Objection : " Though the sense-organ is all-pervading, yet,
in as much as it would be moved to activity only by the purpose
of the person (to whom it belongs) it would apprehend ils
objects only when it would move out from its restiog place ( if^
the body), with an operative energy io keeping with the character of the apprehension of the object concerned ; and as such
there would be no absence of restriction (as to the perceptibility of near and distant sounds)."
Reply: The sense-organs are for the purpose of the perception of objects; the perception of the object is dependent
upon the opetafcive energy (of the organs) ; but as a matter of
fact, the aeose-organ too is nothing apart from these operative
energies; as anything apart from these would be useless, and
would have no evidence for its existence. Now tben,fcheoperative

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Akä$a.

133

energy of the Ear does nor», as a matter of fact, go to the place
where its object is situated, and then apprehend it; as if it were
so, then as in the case of visual perception, so in th it of auditory
perception ajso, there could be no doubt as to the direction
from which the sound proceed-. Nor could the quality itself
come out of its own substratum (to the places of the sense-organ);
uor can the soun 1 in the conch be said to produce other sounds
in the interval (between the conch and the Ear); as in the case
of all qualities of tangible substances, we find, it is only in
another substance produced out of those substances, that the
specific qualities of these latter are found to produce like
qualities in these produced substances; while in the case of the
couch, we do not find, in the interval between the conch and the
Ear, uny substance produced out of the conch ( wherein the
sound of the conch could produce another sound) ; nor can there
be an apprehension of that which doe! not reach the sense-orgao;
as otherwise there would be many absurd possibilities ; hence it
must be admitted that if the sound were a quality of the couch,
it could never be perceived (heard). As a matter of fact however we do find it being perceived ; hence it is this perception
that proves the fact of its being the quality of a substance other
than any such as the conch and the like ;—this other substance
being one that pervades over the space intervening between the
concli and the Ear, and wherein the scund proceeding from the
conch would produce successive sounds, till the proximity of the
Ear is reached, and its perception duly accomplished.
The author next proceeds to show that Sound cannot be
the quality of the Soul.
(1) Because it is peresptible by an external sense-organ.
The Ear is an external sense-organ ; because it always manifests
(or makes perceptible), extern il objects, like the Eye. Then
again, Sound is made perceptible by that orgao, as its perception
n found to appear only so long as the organ exists. And that
which is perceptible by the external sense-organs cannot be a
quality of the Soul; as we find in the case of Colour and other

J34

?RA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. IV SECTION (6),

qualities { perceived by the external sense-Organs). Hence it
mast be concluded that Sound eaunot be the property of the
Soul.
(2). For the following reason too, Sound cannot belong
to the Soul: Because it is perceived by of her Soul*—i. e. it is
perceived by many cognising Souls. In the case of the sound
proceeding from the lute, we find that the same sound that is
heard by one man is also heard by another person at the
same place, through the series of sound-vibrations ( emanating
from the lute). Such is not found to he the case with Pleasure
and other such iuternal qualities (belonging to the Soul). Hence
differing in this important point from the recognised qualities of
the Soul, Sound cannot be regarded as a quality of that.
(3). Also hecause it is not found to inhere in the
Soul,— in this ressembling the qualities of Colour etc. (which do
not belong to the Soul).
Objection : " It has not been proved that Sound does not
inhere in the Soul."
Reply : Not so; because« as a matter of fact we and that
Sound like Colour &c., is perceived as something external, while
all the qualities of the Soul are perceived as internal.
(4) Sound cannot be a quality of the Soul—because it is
always perceived as distinct from all notions of ' I'—that is
to say it is not perceived as existing in the same substratum as
the idea of' I \ It is a well-recognised fact that, that which
is a quality of the Soul is always perceived as being in the same
substratum as the notion of ' I.'—e. g. * I am happy/ ' I am
unhappy' and the like, (where happiness is cognised as existing in the Soul which is also spoken of as *L)' Sound is never
found to be perceived in the same manner; hence it cannot
be a quality of the Soul.
Objection: " We have such a notion as ' I am a man of
pleasant words' (' priyavdgaham' where the * word' 5s expressed as existing in the same substratum as the notion of T."

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Akä<;a.

135

Reply : True ; but in this assertion the ' I ' is spoken of as
one capable of giving utterance to pleasant words, and not as
the sustratum of these. As for instance, in the case of the
Sounds proceeding from the drum, we never recognise the drum
as the sui»stratum of the sound (out only as emitting it.)
Page 61»3 In order to show that Sound cannot be a property of
Space, or of Time, or of the Mind,—the Author adds the reason
beciv.se it is perceptible by the Ear. The sense of this is that
the qualities of Conjuuction and the like, which are accepted by
both parties as belonging to Space, Time and Mind, are never
found to be perceptible by the Ear; while Sound is found to be
perceptible by it; hence Sound cannot be a quality of these.
Then again, the very fact of Sound being a Specific quality
proves that it cannot belong to Space, &c, which do not possess
any specific qualities. This is what is meant, by the expression
because it is a specific quality—which embodies the argument:
Sound is not a quality of Space, Time and Mind,—because it is
a specific quality,—like Pleasure &c.
Objection: u For proving a single fact, it is useless to
bring forward a large number of arguments."
Reply: The uselessness of other proofs in a matter proved
by one proof—is this useiessness due to the fact of there being
no good arising from them, or to the fact of no further arguments being needed by men ? It cannot be the former; as we
find th it the later proofs are also found to actually serve a useful purpose, just like the first proof. Nor is it that men do not
need further proofs. As we find that, in the case of a thing that
is exceptionally sweet in its nature, and which gives additional
pleasure at each sight or experience of it,—there is a desire to see
it again and again, even after it has been seen once ; e. g. in
the case of a dear child. Even in a case where men should not
require further proofs, we find that the man is urge'd to activity
as much by the later, as by the former proofs; and as such
none coii-Id be rejected as altogether useless. Specially as they

136

PRAgASTAPÄDA BttÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (6)

are found to serve the distinctly useful purpose ofall pointing
out the same object.
Objection : " When there is a pounding of what has already
been pounded (doing of what has already been done), there can
be no cessatiou of activity in the same line ; and this will
ie.ii to ao useful result. As what the former proof does is also
to point out the object with a view to which the other person
is urged to acfcivi&y towards a useful purpose ; and when this
object his been once pointad out by that poof, any other proof
for the suiie effect, c mid uot h tve tivi sarn? degree uf operative
instrumentality (towards the same end)."
Reply: Not so; became towards its own object the latter
proof has the same degree of operative instrumentality as any other
If it were not so, there would be no validity for the cognitions
appearing in a continuous series ; as every one of these refer is to
the same object; and even the siight differences in the point of
time of each of these are nor, quite perceptible. Nor would this
lead to a regmsms ad infinitum; as the series would naturally
stop when there would be no means for the appearance of the
cognition.
Question: "Even though Sound may not be a quality
of Earth and the other seven substances, yeö what has that got
to do with the existence of Äkäga ?"
The Author supplies the answer—' Parigeihat\ (by 'exclusion'). That is to say, Sound is a quality ; a quality could
not exist without something in which it would subsist; it does
not subsist in Earth and the other seven substances except
Äkägä; hence that iu which the quality of Sound subsists u
Äkä$ä ; this is the reason which, by exclusion, proves the existence, and gives us an idea, of Äkdgä. The proper form of the
inferential argument would be this :—Sound is a quality of a
substance other than the Earth &c.—because while being a
quality, it is not found to subsist in the Earth and the other
seven substances ; that which is not a quality of some other

SPEC! AL SU BSTANCES : A ut^a.

\ 37

substance can never be a quality and yet not 8'ibsist in the
Earth a«iii the uther seven substances,—as a corroborative instance we have the case of Colour &c. which proves the proposition by the law of cootraries.
The fact of Sound being a quality of Äkäc*y has beea
pointe i out by m 'aas of the argument brought forward to prove
the existence of ÄJc.iga itself; and the author now proceeds to
point oufc other qualities of Äk-lca, such as Number and the rest.
Page 62 ] Thz distinguishing feit *re o/Smnd bving common
<&c. Sound is the distinguishing feature of Äkäga; and as Sound is
common to all Aktiva, it proves that Äklgi is one only;—that is
to say, in the absence of any proof for any diversity or multiplicity thereof.
Objection: "Sounds are many, in the shape of the loud, the
louder aud so forth."
R'p'y : True ; but it is not in this form of loud &c. that S:
sound is the distinguishing feature of Äkäga, to which it belongs
only as a qu ility ; and certainly the quality of sound is one only,
an 1 being common to the Äkfy t, it could not ia any way be
indicative of the diversity in its substrate ; an 1 as for the diversities of 'loud* &c , it is quite possible f n* these to proceed from
a singk substratum, through the diversities in the originating
cause.
F.om this singleness follows its individual isolation :—
In as much as there are no proofs for the diversity of Äkxga it
is universally recognised as one only; and this also proves its
Isolation or separateneas.
Some people hold th-it un-ty is not a particular number,
but is only the specific form of the object. But for these people,
there could be no suoh expression as 'one jar,* as the two words
being synonymous, it, would be taut »logical.
Others h>ld IsoUtion or sep^ra^e less to be natural to all
things. But the^e pe »pie w »uli have a cogniv.o:» of the separateTo

'

138

PR\gv3TAP\DA BHÄ3AYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (6)

ness of a thing without any Mea of the other tiling (from which
it is separate),—just as we have of unity. As a matter of fact,
however, this is not possible; as the i. lei'of separateness that
people have is always tn this form—'this is separate from that'
(which involves an idea of both things). Therefore Unity and
Separateness cannot he regarded as one and the same.
Äkäga beinj spoke a of as <dL~per>jalliuj, it indicates the
fact of its Dimension briny, the hiyhest. The fact of Äk'ea,
being a substance having prove I that it has Dimension, the
Sutra—The Äkäcais gre»t because of its all-pervading character1
shows that it is endowed with the highest Dimension. Whatever
is all-perva ling has the greatest Dimension,— e. a. the Soul,—
and Äkäga is all-rervading ;—therefore this too has the greatest
Dimension.
Question : " How is the all-pervading character of Akcga
proved ? "
Answer : This is proved by the fact of sound being prduced
at all places. If Aklra were not all-pervading, then sound could
not be produced every where; as without its material cause, no effect
can be produced (and ÄJc ~ga is the material cause of sound). All
the sound that is produced, in heaven, in the sky, or on the earth,
must be regarded as inhering in one and the aama substrate,—
because they all belong to the c!as3 of 'sound', like the sound
ihitt is heard, and that which is produced in the starting ; the
fact of the sound as it is heard, and as it is produced in the
beginning, inhering in one and the same subs'rtCtirn must he
inferred from the re'ationship between them of cause and effect;
(i. <?. th » sound in its initial stag^ is r.he cause of the same iu the
condition in which it is heard); because nothing that is not
in the same substratum as the effect can ever bj tlu material
causj of this lattar.
The sv.tra faying down the fact af AkJ$a hehiq the 'cause
af Sound' indicates the presence in it of Conjunction and
Disjunction. We have the SUtra—'Sound is produced by Coo-

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES: Akä$a.

j 39

junction, Disjunction and S >undf; and this Sutra distinctly indicates that Conjunction and Disjunction are th-j cause of Sound,
a quality of Akdga\ and this shows that these—Conjunction and
Disjunction—beiong to Alcana ; as if thoy did not subsist in the
same substratum (with sound), they could uut be its material
cause.
Thus then, bzinj endowed with qua' it its, ar>d not subsisting in any oth#r sub-it rate Akctci must be regarded as a
substance. As Akägi h «s qualities, it is a substance, like the
jar &c. Nor for this reason alone is Akdgrt a substance, but for
anottier reason also,—i e on account of its not subsisting in any
other thing,—being in this, like tho Atom.
In as much as it *s without cause, either homogenous or
heterogenous, it is eternal. A 'homogenous' cause is the
material cause, and the 'heterogenous' cause is the immaterial
cause auvl the instrumental cause; the absence of these, in the
case of Akäca proves that it is eternal.
It is the cause of the perception of sound by all living
beings.
Objection: " If it were so then all beings would hear all
sounds, AkäfCa existing everywhere equally."
Page 63 ] Reply: In tht shape of the Ear; and the Eitr also &c.
'Crauana ('Ear') is that whereby something is heard ('Grüyateanena). The meaning is that the seuse of Audition is that portion of Alcana which is called by the name of 'Cravanavivara*
('Ear-cavity') [ this is proved by.the fact of there being no perception of Sound when this cavity is closed.
The author points out the qualifications of this organ : Ft is
aided <&c. Th) 'experiences caused by Sound' are those of
pleasure and pain ; and the organ is aided by such Virtue and
Vice as bring about the pleasures and pains due to Sound. The
sense of this is that the exterior sense-organ which apprehends
the specific quality of a substance is itself endowed with the same

140

PRAQASTAPÄDA BBÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (7),

quality; e. g. the Eye which apprehends Colour is itself a
substratum of Colour ; similarly in as mach &s the Enr apprehends the Sound described a^ove, it must be regarded as having Sound for its quality ;. but we have proved that Sound
can be a quality of Äkica only; hence wo conclude that the
Auditory organ is Äklca\ and though, as such, it is ail-pervading in its character, yet it does not bring about the perception of all Sounds everywhere; as it is only when the Äkäca
is limited within the tympanum of the Eir that it acquires the
character of the 'sense-organ.' Just as though the Soul is allpervading, yet it is only when it is confined within the body
that it has the character of the 'Coguiser1 ; and the reason for this
is that the only purpiso «erred by the bo ly is that it brings
about the experiences of ehe Soul, otherwise the body would be
altogether useless.
Qf/jection: " If such be the case, then the deaf person
would also hear Souni, as he teas the tympanum inact."
Reply : Though the Äkäca of the Ear is eternal, yet deafmess is produce \ by the discrepancies in the accessories, in the
shape of Virtue and Vice.
SECTION (7).
ON TIME.

Text (Iß) :—Time is the cause of the contrary* notions of
'Priority' * Posteriority,' of 'simultaneity' and
Succession,' and of1 late' and ' soon.' In as much
as there is no other ca^ise or basis for these notions, as appearing with regard to these objects,—
notions which differ in character from all notions
described before,—we conclude ' Time' to be the
basis of these. II-ii-6.
$.—The translation follows the rather forced interpretation of the
Kcmd&tt. It appears better to take ' vyatikara' in the sense of relationship;
Time
m
«hat caa* would be the basis of the notion of such relationships as those
rfi Priority' and Poateii >rity.'

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Time.

141

Time is the cause or basis of the production,
and destruction (or cessation) of all produced
things; as all these are spoken of in terms of
time. It is also the basis of suck conventional
usages as ' kshana,' lava,' ' nimösha,' ' käshthä,'
kola I' muhürta,'' yäma,' ' ahorätra,'' ardhamäsa,'
x
m>~isa,' ' rtu,' ' ayana' ' samvatsara,' 'yugä,'
'IcaTpa' ' manvanfara,' 'prolaya ' and * mahäpralaya.' II-ii-9.
Its qualities are—Number, Dimension, Separateness,
Conjunction and Disjunction.
Its unity is
proved by the fad of the distinguishing feature
of l time1 being common (to all periods of it).
From that follotos its Sepa^atenes*. The declaration ' the name hdla applies to the cause' in the
Sütra indicates the presence in Time of the
greatest Dimension. The declaration of the
'posteriority and priority of the cause causing the
notions of posteriority and priority' indicates the
presence of Conjunction; [Page 64] and there
would be Disjunction as the destroyer of this
Conjunction. II-ii-8 II-i-31 VII-i-25 VII-ii-22.
The fact of time being a substance, and that of its being
eternal are proved as in the case of Äicäca. II-ü-7.
Though from the uniformity of the distinguishing
character of Time, Time is directly by itself, one
only, yet, it is indirectly, or figuratively, spoken
of as manifold, on account of the diversity
among the conditions ajforded by (he production,
persistence and cessation of all produced things;
just a* toe have (diversity) in the case of the Gem
or the Cook
Commentary«
The author now proceeds to describe Time. The notions

142

PRA(?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. IV. SECTION (7).

of the ' Posteriority' and 'Priority' of time are spoken of as
* contrary,' with reference to the same notions as regarding
Space. That is to say, that which is ' prior' in point of space
is 'posterior' in point of time, and vice versa. This notion,
as well as of those of 'succession' &c. &c is based upon time.
Objection: "Time is imperceptible; hence there could be
no recognition of its invariable concomitauce with the notions of
' priority' and * posteriority'; how then could it be rejafded
as the distinctive cause of the3e notions ?"
Reply: We infer this from the fact of there boing no
other cause for the notions of succession &cM with regard to
their respective objects;—these notions being totally differe.it
in character from those de bribed before. That is to say, it is
a well recognised fact that with regard to such objects as
Substance* and the rest, there appear the notio is . of * priority,'
/posteriority' and the like. Substance an 1 other things themselves could not be the cause of these notions; as these are wholly
different from the notions of subsume &c; nor could any
effect be produced without ai adequate etu«e; hence we
conclude that that which is the cause of these, is Time.
Some people hold that the notions of ' priority' and
'posteriority', in the case of the ' old ' and 'young' respectively, is
based upon the greater and lesser number of the revolutions of
the Sun.
This is not right; as the revolutions of the Sun are not in
any way« related to the young and old ; and if that which is not
related were to be regarded as the cause, then that would mean
a total confusion ^anything couM be regarded as the cause of anything).
Others regard 'simultaniety' to consist in mere 'Sahabhäva'
r(exiatence together, Associaton or co existence). This too is not
right; as unless we accept the existence of Time, the word' saha'
('together') in this connection would have no meaning.

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES ; TIME.
Ojject on :" The meaning of ' saha * would consist in the
simultaneous ai'itual preclusion of things, with regard to a
certain action."
R'.pl'i: This cannot b<3; a-; there $m be no such mutual
preclusion a nong tilings th ifcare not siuii as have been proiuced,
have existed, a;i 1 have eea.e 1 to exist. If the mutual preclusion be hJI i to belong to things that exist togetlwr,—then that
would be an admission of 'Time/
Similar explanations may also be given of the notions of
'non-si:ouitaneity ('Succession') &c. also.
Question: " Ti ne being one and the same always, whence
the diversity of notions with regard to it ? "
Answzr : This diversity is due to the diversity in the
accessory circumstances. For instance, when we have a simultaneous apprehension of the p od lotion and persistence of two
objects, by one an 1 the same cognition (notion or idea ),—tben
it is that thi Ti no, a:oo npmying thase (production an4 J)ersi^teuce) gives ris-3 to thj ruUoiis of later' and 'sooiier* (as
'posteriority' and 'priority'). We have the notion of simultaneity
brought about by a single ognition of the productions and
operations of many things ; while the notions of'quick* and 'alow'
are brought about by the cognitioa of the greater aud less
nmnb-r of the active moments intervening between the production an 1 functioning of the objects un ler consideration; and
so f >rth we explain the other ideas in regard to Time.
Objection: " We may attribute the various notions to the
circumstan'es p »culiar to each ca3e ; anl thus there would be
no nee 1 of postulating any such thing as Time."
Page 65. ] R^ply: This cannot be; as if there were no Time,
nothing coal i be pro luced. That is to say, there can be no production for Äk $a which has an absolute existence ; nor of the
'man's, horn' whi^h is absolutely non-existent; and hence the only
production that woul i be possible would be that of something

144

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. IV. SECTION (7).

not having a previous existence ; and if there were no Time, the
word 'previous' woull have no meaning; an<i as such the said
qualification of the non-existence ( of the object to be produced)
not being available, there would be no peculiarity that would
make it an object of production as distinguished from Akäga
and 'man's horns'; and thus we would have no production at all.
Question : " How couH any actual cognition be qualified
by Time, which is an imperceptible entity ? "
To this some people make the following reply: The action
of Time in the bringing about of a qualified cognition, is in the
manner of at cause, like the sense-organs—and not in »he way of
a mere accessory, like that of the stick (in the making of the
jar.)
Bat this is not correct.. As a cognition, consisting as it does
of pure consciousness, can have no peculiar cause, apart from
the relationship of the object. . Hence we offer another reply to
the above question:
In the old and the young we find that there is a difference
ill ^heir bodily coalitions ; as a cause of this difference we infer
the connection of Time; and it is after this inference that we
have an idea of their being qualified by Time ; and in as much
as the cogniser of both (the young and the old) is one and the
same person, there can be nothing incongruous in the fact of the
qualifying adjunct (Time) being cognised by means of cognition
(Inference) other than that of the objects (oki and young) themselves. As instances of diverse means of knowledge coalescing in
their functions, we have such notions as 'this sandal is fragrant'
(where the sandal is seen by the Eye, and the fragrance is
inferred); or the notion 'this earth is without the jar/ in
which, according to the Mioiansaka, the absence of the jar is
cognised by Negation, while the spot is perceived by the Eye.
In the case of such objects as the jar and the like, on account of
their being corporeal ( material or bodied) substances,—or on

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Time.

145

account of these having various conditions,—we infer the relationship of the bodied substance with Time; and then there
follow the notions of simultaneity &e., as qualified by that Time.
And these notions (of simultaneity &c.) are put forward as the
pointers of Time, only against one who denies the fact of these
being the effects of Time. And certainly, there can be nothing
wrong in this*
The author gives a reason for this. 'jTadvyapadegai'—('As
all these are spoken of in terms of Time')—That is to say, the
productions &c. are spoken of in terms of Time, e. g. 'the time
of production,1 'time of destruction/ and so forth. And from
this fact we infer that Time is the cause of all these.
He points out other effects of time—'kskana &c.' 2 feshanas
make one Lavi, 4 kshanas make one nimesha—which is the
time taken l>y a single wink of the Eye ; and so forth the
various divisions of Time treated of in Arithmetical works.
The Substaoce Time having been proved to exist, the author
proceeds to point out its qualities. * Tasya gunäh <fcc/ Time
being a Substance, it must have the qualities of Number &c;
and so the Author with a view to esplain the particular forms
of these, says—'hälalingävigeshät.' That is to say, the distinguishing features of Time, in the form of the notions of simultaneity and the rest, being common to,all Time, it is regarded
as one only ; specially as there is no proof for believing in a
multiplicity of Time.
Objection: " The notions of simultaneity and succession &c.
are themselves diverse; and these distinctly point to the multiplicity of Time."
Reply: It is not so ; because even when Time is one only,
the diversity of the notions can be explained as being due to
the diversity of other attendant auxiliary conditions.
From this follows its separaUness—That is to say unity
is always accompanied by separateness; hence the unity of
Time proves its Beparateness also,

146

PRACASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. IV. SECTION (7.)

Rärane fdlam <&c— This refers to the süträ kärane
k . läkhyä.' The meaning of the süträ is that the name 'Time
is applied to the cause of the notions of simultaneity &c, and
this shows that Time is all-pervading; as thes -• notions are
present everywhere (wiiieh would not be possible if their cause
were not all-pervading).
Pftge 6 6 ] K iranaparatvSdivaeanat &c. This refers to the
süträ—'Kdranap tratvät käranüparatv^t ca paratv iparatve,'—
in which the expression 'kSranaparatva' deuotes the conjunction
of Time with the material object; and this proves that Time
has the quality of Conjunction.
TadjinlfakatvM &c.—i. e. the Conjunction being caused
and as such necessarily destructible, the destroyer of this
could be nothing else save Disjunction; as the destruction of
the substrate (of the Conjunction) does n>t always preceJe tire
destruction of the Conjunction ( i. e. the two things conjoined
together co u tin a e to exist, even after they have been disjoined
from each other). This proves that Disjunction is a quality of
Time ; because th3 D^juaction destructive of a previous Conjunction could not exist without a substratum.
Like Äkaga, Time is a Substance and is eternal. That is
to say, just as Äk Iga is a substmce, on accouut of its having
qualities, and n>t having^hy other substratum,—so in the same
mauner, is Time also; and just as Äkdg t is regarded to be
eternal, on account of its having no homogenous or heterogenous
cause,—so is Time also.
Question: * If Time is one only, whence, then, do>is it come
to be spoken of as manifold 1"
Answer—KäLaliagävigeihät That is to say, tliough the
denoters of TUne^-such as, the notions of ptiority, posterioiity
and the like—ar<* the sam-2 in all cases, and as such proparly
speaking, primarily Tune is oae only, yet it is spoken of as diverse,
through diversity berag imposed upon it indirectly. That is to
say, it is spoken of as manifold OQ accouut of the diversity of such

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Space.

147

conditions as the beginning or production, continuance or
persistence, an 1 dUap tear cnce or destruction, of all things.
Just as a single piece of crystal comes to be spoken of as blue,
yellow &c, through the diversity of the coloured objects in
its proximity,—so in the same manner, though Time is one
only, yet on account of thi diversity of th^ said conditions, it
coraos to be spoken of as the ' tim3 of production/ ' time of
persistence,' ' time of destruction,' and so forth.
In view of the fict that the connection of the crystal with
the coloured objects is not real (but merely imposed from without), while that of Tinas with the siid actions is real,—the
author cites another example : PJ,ca»a <&;. ; just as one and the
same person comes to be spoken of as a ' cook ' an 1 a ' reader '
through the diversity of his actions, so in the sam? manner, with
Time also. Nor can the actions of beginning Sec. themselves
be said to be Time, as they are recognised as something wholly
different.
SECTION (8).
ON SPACE.

Text (J3J -—Space is the cause or haw of Vie notions of
East, West &c. That is to say, it is that from
which arise the ten notions—of Bast, South-Ei*t,
South, South-West, West, North-Went, North,
North-West, Bel >w and Above—with regard to one
corporeal (material) object considered with reference t > another material object as the st irting
point or limit.
Specially so, as there is no other cause available (for these
notions).
Page 67] Its qualities are: Number, Dimension, S^p irateni$8, Conjunction an I Disjunction. The pretence
of these in Space a%e to be shown as indlca'cd

148

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (8)

the Sutra, in the same way as in the case of Time.
Il-ii-12, ll-i-3J, ViI-i-24, VII-ii-21
Though the character of Space by itself is uniform and one
only, yet, for the sake of the usages of the Qruti,
the Smrtis and the ordinary people the Great
fjishis have coined the ten literal names—' Praci'
(East) and the rest—which pertain of the contacts
of the Sun, revolving round the Meru, with the ten
points of Space presided over by the ten Deities.
Thus then it is only indirectly or figuratively
ih a5 we speak of the ' ten quarters'. To these
quarters is given another set of names
based upon the names of the deity presiding over
each of them—viz: 'Mähendrl* (East), ' Vaicvdnari (S. CO,' Yumya' (S.) 'Nairrtf (S. W.), ' Värunl1 (W.) 'Väyavyä (N. W.), 'Kauberi* (N.),
'AicanV VN. K), 'Brahmi' (Above,) and Ndgi
(Below.) II-ii-13 to 16.
Commentary.
Just as the distinguishing feature of Time lies in the fact
of its being the cause of the notions of simultaneity &c\, &c.,
so that of Space lies in the fact of its being the basis of the
notions of East, West &c. This same fact is further explained.
For an immatarial object there is no boundary or limit, and as
such the ideas of east, west &c. cannot apply to it; for the simie
reason that their dimension is Hot limited; hence the author
has said—* taking a material object for the limit'; that is to say,
Space is that from which there arises with regard to material
objects, the idea that, ' this is to the East of that/ and so forth.
In the sense of ' this is to the East of that/ we h&ve the form
pürvena as in the case of this word the Instrumental is laid
dowu as signifying the sense of the basic noun.
Objection: "The notions of East, West &c., being effects
justify simply the inference of a Cause ; but whence do you conelude that it is Space that is this cause ? "

SPECIAL SUBSTANCE : Space.

j 49

Reply: There being no other cause. For the notions in
question, a mere substance could not be the cause ; for in thai
case, in whatsoever position the substance would be, it would
give rise to the notions in question, which is absurd. We would
have the same absurdity, even if the notions were held to originate from two substances as related to eaoh other; and in this
case there would be the further absurdity if tho absence of both
of the notions in question were attributed to Actions and Qualities, as in th'it case, there could be no such notions in the case of
substances having similar Actions and Qualities. For these
reasons it must be admitted that that which is the cause of these
notions is Sp ice. And this is also shown by the fact of the direction being expressed by such words as ' idam etasmät p&rvam '
'(this to the Bast of that)', where we have the Ablative (in etasmat); if this did not originate from Space, then the Ablative
would be meaningless.
Page 68 ] It might be argued that the Ablative would denote
limit. True, it would ; but limit also is with reference to Space,
and not with reference to any and every substance; as in the
latter case, it would be the same in all cases.
Though Space is itself imperceptible, yet it must, like 'Time,
be regarded as the. cause of certain particular notions.
The author now proceeds to show that Space has the character of a substance, in that it is endowed with qualities :—Tasyäatu &c. The existence of these is established as in the case of
Time. That is to say, as Time is one only on account of the common character of Time in all points of if, so in the same manner,
the character of Space being common to all points in Space, it
it one only. And from this siugleness follows its Separateness.
And as in the case of Time, its Great Dimension is indicated by
the sentence 'Kärane Kdlak * so is the Great Dimension of
Space indicated by the sentence 'Kdrane dik,' specially as the
effect of this, in the shape of the notions of East, West; &c, is
present everywhere. Then as the presence of the quality of

150

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄStiYA-CHAP. IV. SECTION (8).

Coi'junction in Time is indicated by the expression 5 Kdranaparatvät,' so al^o its presence in Space would be similarly indicated ; and as in the case of Time the quality of Disjunction was
proved to exist as the destroyer of Conjunction, so would it be"
in Space also.
Objection: " The fact of the distinguishing feature of
Space being one only is uot esrai»Halted ; as we find the notions
ofEa-t, West &c , differing fiom one another; aud thus it is
only proper to hold that there is a multiplicity or diversity of
Spaces."
Reply : Nut so; because we find that with reference to
one and the same object we have all the notions of East, West
&c, as taken with reference to its position in regard to different
substances If the notions of East &c, were based on so many
dififiereut spaces, then the thing that would be recognised as ' to
the East,' could not, at that same time, be known as * to the
West.'
Objection : uThe object may be in relation with all spaces."
Reply : In that case every object in the world would be regarded as to the East, West, North and South, of every other
thing. As a matter of fact however we do not find any such
idea with regard to any object. Hence we conclude that Space
is one ouly, and the iliversity of notions is due to the diversity
in the accessories. For instance, ' East' is the name given to
that extent of Space which happens to lie between,the place of
the lising sun, aud the object in a straight lioe with it; and
the name ' West' to that which lies between the place of the
setting Suaanvi the object in a straight line with it; and the names
North1 aud 'South' is applied to than where the Sun is never
seen, as consivlered with reference to an object that is in a position
that would lie in a line fvith the meridian point; and the intervals between these come to be known as 'South-East ' and the
like. The diversity of the notions is thus very easily explained as being due to the accessory circumstances.

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES: Space.

151

Nor c.in all r.hese notions be taken, us being due to the connecion of the San (ami as such not indicative of any such
distinct substance as Space). Because the Sun is not found to
be in direct cont;»ct with any material object; and that which
is not. so connected could not be the cause of the notions in
«juestion. Tu is is what the author means to show by the
clause dhjlingavice*hät; That is to say, Space being found
to be one only, the ten names of 'East' &c, were formed by
the Great Rshis. And these names were 'anvartha*—'literally
applicable' to those conjunctions and disjunctions of the Sun
with the points of Space presided over by fene ten "Ruling
or Protecting Divinities, Indra nnd the vest. For instance, the
point of Space where the Sun appears first.of all (pratkamam
anati), was named ' präci' •' (East') ; thi'.t which the Sun touches as1 ant (aväk ancati) was n am ed, * A vaci' (' South *); that
which the Sun touches li«t fiPratyak ancati)^wns named * pra(v-l' (West); an \ that which he touches high {udak ancati)
was named (Udici (North). All these positions a*e thos* that
the Sun takes while revolving round the mount Meru. These
names were made by fl.e Rxir's for the sake of the prop« r performance of the Vedlc, Smdita and ordinary actions. As an
instance of (1), we have the sentence * one should not sleep with
his head towards the WcM* of (2) < one desiring loog life takes
his food, facing the Easi'; and of (3), such assertions, as ' Go to
the East/ 'look to the S«»u h,1 and so forth.
Page €9 ] ^n a s mi*9h ns the Rshis coined ten n?rmes, Sp^ce is
figuratively divided into ten forms. As for the names *Mühtndri'
and the like, they do not belong to any other things ; they are
synonymous with the names given above, but are based upon other
conditions (than that of the Solar contact). This is what ia.
meant by—Täsämeua &c. * Mahendn/ is that which belongs to
Mahendrn ; and that which belongs to Vaicvaoara is the ' Vaiqvdnari ' (South); and so forth.

152

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (9).
SECTION (9;.
ON ÄTMA.

Text Hi):'At na, Self, is that which belong- to the class
1
Ätmä';
VIEI-i-2. III-i-2.
In as muck as it is extremely subtile in its character, and
a>* such imp rceptible, Us cojnition is brought
about by rru a is of the organs of hearing &c, as inferred from perception of Sound &c;—aided by
the fact of such instruments as the ave and the like
being always operated by a doer or ageni*..
In the cognitions of sound <&c., also we infer a ' cojniser.1
This character cannot belong to the Body, or to
the Sense-organs, or t) the Mind; because all these
are unint.ll-gent or unconscious. Consciousness
cannot belong to the body; as it is a) miterial
proditci, iltce the jar; and also as no consciousness
in found in d:ad bodies.
Nor can.consciousness belona tothe Sense-organs ; because
these are mere instruments, and also because we
haue remembrances of objects even after the senseorgan has been destroyed, and even uhen the
object is not in contact with the organ.
NojLsan it belong to the Mind; because if the mind be regarded as functioning independently of the other
organs, then we would have per ep ion and remembrance simultaneously presenting themselves
(and if the mind be regarded as functioning
through the other organs, then it would be the
same as 'ÄtmI); and alsj because the mind its If
is a mere instrument
A nd thus the only way thing to ivhich consciousness could
belong is the Self, which thus is cognised by this
consciousness.

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Ätmn.

153

A< from the motion of the chariot we infer the existtnc
of an intelligent guiding agent id the shape of
the charioteer, so aho we infer an intelligent
guiding agent for the body, from the activity
and cessation from activity a pairing in the
body, which have the capacity of acquiring the
desirable and avoiding the undesirable object.
III-i-19.
The intelligent agent i* aUo inferred fr-im the actions
of breathing <&c. " Hoiv ? " (1) When ive perceive
a variegated functioning of the Air contained in
the body, {we infer the existence of a guiding
ayev*t), who iwmld act like the blower of the windP'p°" (?) From the regular action of winking
vp and down., ive infer the existence of the
agent, ivho would he like the puller of a pulley.
(3) Fro>n the fact of the wounds of the body being
healed up, vje infer the existence of the agent who
would be like the master of a house repairing it
(4) From the action of the mind towards the contart of the sense-organs apprehending desirable
objects, we infer the existence of the agevi, who
would be like the boy in a corner of the house
throwing a baU {to another ball stuck in the
ground). (5) When ive see an object by the Eye,
and th?n recalling the taste of that object, we find
a. certain moditic^tion appearing in the organ of
ta*te; from this we infer the existence of a
if'nufU guiding agent for t/<e two <>prr<U'tons, like
a p'rson looking through two window*. (0)
Then ag<hin, from the qualities of Pleasure. Pain,
D-si.ie, Avers ton and Effort, w* infer the existence
of one to whum these qmdiOes belong. Th««<>
qualities can not belong either to the Body, or to th?

154

PRAgASTAPÄOA BHÄSHYA-rCHAP. IV. 3ECTI0K (9).
Sense-organs; («) because these are found to be
coexistent with the notion of ' I ; ' (6) because
these qualities exist only in certain parts of the
object to whieh they belong ; (c) because they are
not coeval ivith their substratum; (d) because
they are not perceptible by the external organs of
perception. (7) The existence of the Self (as a
distinct substance) is also proved by the fact of
its being spoken of by means of the word 'I'
which is wholly distinct from the words ' Earth?
' Water ' &c. III-ii-4 to 13.
The qualities of the Self are, these : Intelligence, Pleasure,
Pain, Desire, Aversion, Effort, Virtue, Vice,
Faculty, Number, Dimensiont Separateness, Conjunction and Disjunction. The Sütra, dtaling
with the distinguishing features of the Self has
mentioned the qualities, from Intelligence down
to Effort. The presence of Virtue and Vice is
indicated by the mention of the fact of the qualities of one Self not being the cause of the appearance of a quality in another Self. The existence
of Faculty is indicated by the mention of this
a? being the cause in the bringing about of
remembrance. The presence of Number is indicated by the mention of' Restriction *; and from
that follows Sep'irateness. The Greatest Dimention of the Self is mentioned in the Sütra * so is
the Self also.' The fact of Pleasure &c. being due
to contact proves the existence of Conjunction in
the Self: and Disjunction is the destroyer of that
Conjunction. III-ii-4, 20, 21. VI-i-5. IX-ii-6
VII-i-22.
Commentary.
The author now proceeds to describe that, for whom the

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Ätmä.

15S

knowledge of truth brings the highest good, and false knowledge leads to birth and rebirth* and for whose purpose are all
tbe things (in the world),
ÄtmatväbhiaambandJiM &c.—lÄtmatva' is the name of a
generality or class; and the relationship or presence of this
generality makes the substance known as'Ätmä;' and it is the
fact of belonging to this class that differentiates the Self from
all other things.
Objection : *As a matter of fact we find that the existence
• of a perceptible objeet is always accompanied by a cognition of its
ahape or form; in the case of the Self we find there is no cognition of the shape of the Self; and hence not finding its invariable concomitant, we cannot but reject the existence of the
Self; aad under the circumstances why should any attempt have
been made towards the ascertaining of its distinguishing features ? "
Reply: There is no reason for setting aside the notion of
the existence of Self; because the absence of the setise-perception of it is implied in its very nature. On the other hand, for
its existence we have a proof in the shape of Inference. And
the author proceeds to show this : Tasya dcc.y Sabtillty consists
in the incapability of being perceived by the senses; and this
subtile Self is cognised by meaus of the Inference based upon
the Senses of audition, and the rest whose existence, as belonging
to the imperceptible Self, is proved by means of Inference ;
e. g, ' The perception of sound &c, are brought about by means
of certain instrumental organs,—because it is an action,—like
the action of cutting (which canuot be brought about without an
instrument in the shape of the axe)' How these organs prove
the existence of the Self is next shown: In the case of such
instruments as the ace and the like, we find that they are always moved or worked by an intelligent agent. That is to say,
whatever Instrument there is in the world, it is found to be worked
by an intelligent agent, as we nod in the case of the axe which is

156

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. IV. SECTION (9)

worked or operated by the carpenter ; and the organ of audition
&c, are all instruments; and as such they must be worked
by something else; and that by which these are worked is the
Self. Though the organ of auiition, which is of the nature of
the Al&yi has no direct relationship with the Self, as Akäga is
all-pervading, yet it has the capability of being worked or operated by the Self, through the substratum of the internal organ
(mind); just as the hand is in contact with the red hot ball of
iron, through the pincer.
The fact of the organs of audition Sec, being instruments
is proved by the fict of their illumining, or manifesting, or renderuing perceptible, definite objects, like the lamp.
Though it is by the mind that we cognise the Self as ' I '
and ' mine/ mixed up with the notions of the doer and the
master, brought about by the limitting conditions of the body
and the organs acquired by it by reason of Its previous deeds,—
yet it is spoken of as ' imperceptible by the sense*,' on account
of its being imperceptible by the external sense-organs.
Gabdddishu prasiddhyi dec. In as much as there is a
cognition of sound and other things we infer from that the existence of the oogniser. For instance—'Cognition must inhere
in something, because it is an action, like the action of the axe;
and that wherein it inheres is the Self.'
Objection: "The cognition cognises the object by itself
and not as inhering in semetl«ing else."
Rfply : Is this cognition eternal, or does it change with
every moment? If it is eternal, then there is a mere difference
of uarne (an what we call ' Seif' is nothing more than an eternal
cogniser) ; while if it be momentary, then there could he no remembrance of something perceived a long time before ; as the
cognition that remembers is something wholly different from
that which had perceived it on the previous occasion.
Objection: "In as much as there is a causal relationship
between the previous cognition and the subsequent remem-

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Ätmd.

157

brauce, the former cognition would be remembered by the latter;
the reason for the sou not remembering that which was perceived by his father lies ia the fact of there being no causal relat/iouship between the cognition of the father and that of the
son ; though there is such a relationship between the bodies of
the two persons (father and son), yet in as much as the bodies are
unconscious things their relationship can have no bearing upon
their cognitions."
Uelpy: This is not right; because if there be no Self, there
would be no idea formed of any causal relationship; as at the time
that the cause would be cognised, there would be no cognition
of the effect, which will not have come into existence at that time;
while at the time that the effect Would be perceived, the cause
will have disappeared in the past, and hence there would be no
cognition of it; and according to one who denies the Self, there
would be no one perceiver of both ; and as such who could
ascertain the causal relationship between these Iwo things appearing one after the other ?
Objection: " The previous cognition cognising itself also
brings about the idea of its causal character, which is nothing
apart from itself. The subsequent coguition cognising itself,
also cognises its character as an effect, which is not distinct from
its own aature. And the character of the cause and that of the
effect, apprehended by each of these cognitions, come to be cogniseil by a simple idea brought about by the single Impression
produced by the two cognitions conjointly."
Reply: These are simply absurd assumptions. How could
the two cognitions, which would be confiued within themselves,
have any such idea as that ' I am the effect or the cause of that
cognition ;' as certainly they would be wholly ignorant of the
conditions of each other. And that which they would not cognise
could not be apprehended by them; as apprehension always
follows in the wake of cognition.
Objection: "We grant that cognition inheres in something
else; and the substrate of cognition we would haveio the Body,

158

PRAC&STAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (9.)

or in the sense-organ, or in the Mind. "
Eeply: It does not belong to the Body, the Sense-organ
or the Mind, What does not belong to these is 'consciousness',
'cxitanya* mentioned in the next sentence. That is to say,
consciousness does not belong to the Body, or to the Sense-organ,
or to the Mind ; because these are * unconscious—i, e. they are
not the material cause of cognition.
Objection: " This argument involves a begging of the question, the premiss being the same as the conclusion."
With a view to this objection, the author adds ' na garira8ya &cj That is to say, Consciousness does not belong to the
Body, because like the jar, the body, is a material product;
as a matter of fact we find that whatever is a material product
is not conscious, as the jar; and the body is a material product:
therefore it cannot be conscious. He adds another argument:— Because \t is not found in the dead body ; the puting forward of the fact of there being no consciousness in the
dead body, is with a view to show that the property of Consciousness is not <wwf»al with its substratum ; the argument thus comes
to this : Consciousness is not a specific quality of the Body, because it is not coeval with (does not exist as long as) its substratum, like Conjunction. From this it follows that Consciousness
does not belong to the material constituentsof the Body ; as if
these constituents were conscious, their product would also be
so ; and there would be numerous cognisers (conscious beings)
in one and the same body ; and the conscious entity not being
one, there could be no adjustment of the activities of the body,
in accordance with the motive or purpose of any one of those
numerous conscioas beings (in the body).
Consciousness does not belong to the sense-organs, because
they are of the nature of instruments. That is to say, the
serae-organs are unconscious, because the} are instruments, like
a stick (in the making of the jar). He adds another argument:— When they are destroyed <kc. That is'to say, as a

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Ätmä.
15<J
• - •;
S
matter of fact we find that even when a sense-organ has been
destroyed we have'distinct remembrances of things previously
perceived by its means ; an 1 certainly no remembrance would
be possible if the cogniser hal beeu destroyed (in the shape of
the sense-organ); hence Consciousness cannot be a quality of
these sense-organs. Then again, we find that we have the remembrance of an object even when the object is not before us (and
not in contact with the sense-organs); (which would not be possible if consciousness belonged to these organs) ; nor could the remembrance be attributed to to these organs) ; as these operate
over objects only by going over to them (which would not be
possible in the case of the absence of the object). Hence Remembrance cannot belong to the sense-organs ; and the absence
of Remembrance would also prove the absence of cognition in
these: as remembrance cannot belong to any other thing say
that to which the previous cognition belongs.
It is for this same reason that Consciousness cannot belong
to the Objects ; as if it were so then there could be no remembrance of the Object after it had been destroyed. For the
following reason also Consciousness cannot belong to the object:
Because we do not find the object having any idea either of its
position or of the pleasure &c, brought about by it; and because
we do not find it ever moving at all with any degree of intelligence. Then again, if consciousness belonged to the Senseorgan, or to the Object, then we could have no such notion as
' I saw the colour, perceived the taste, and am feeling the touch/
which unifies in itself the several cognitions of colour &e;
Colour &c, and Eye &c., are distinct from one another (i. e.
Colour is distinct from Taste, and the Eye from Tongue, and so
on).
Objection: " Consciousness may be a quality of the Mind ;
as it applies to all objects, and is eternal; and as such the unification of cognitions just spoken of would be quite possible in
this case."

160

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. IV SECTION (9),

Reply: It cannot belong to the Mind. H the Mind "be
believed to cognise, by the help of some organ of perception other
than the Eye &c., then your theory differs from me only in
name (you applying the uame * Mind' to svhat we call 'Self).
Page 73-] As wbat this other organ would be is the Mind; and
the Mind which you hold to be the substratum of consciousness
jvouid be whit we call 'Self.' If the Mind does not need the
help of any other orgau save the Eye &c, then, in the case of
an object with a colour, taste &c, being before us all these would
be perceived simultaneously, as there would be a simultaneity
of the causes of their perception. It is only when there is a
need of some other organs that, this organ of the Mind being
atomic in its nature cannot be in touch with all the ordinary
sense-organs at one and the same time, and hence there is1 no
possibility of any simultaneous cognition of Colour, Taste &c.
And if there were no such organ (in the shape of an eternal
organ, Mind), then there would be simultaneous remembrances ;
as there would be no want of any necessary element. Whereas
if there be a need of such an organ, as thexe could be no simultaneous contact with this organ, the remembrances could ouly be
gradual.
•,
It has been held by some people that the Mind, being a
3ingJe eternal entity, cannot bring about any remembrances j
either simultaneously or successively (as in the latter case the j
remembrances would go on ad infiuitum; and as such it could!
not be regarded as having any instrumentality in the bringing
about of remembrauces). But this is not right; because as r e gards the simultaneous bringing about of remembrances, this is •
not possible, then as regards the successive bringing about of them,
when one has been brought about, there can be nothing left to;
be brought about after that; but this does not mean that atl
this latter Time, the Mind does not exist; as we do admit of:
an existence other than that which consists in effective activity.;
For the following reason also consciousness canudt belong
to the Mind ; Because the Mind is itself of the nature of ani

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES: Ätmä.

161

instrument, Th.it is to say, ' Mind is not cousoicua*. because
it is an instrument of consciousness, iij&ß tijue jar.
Objection : " The fact ot' the Mind being an instrument has
not beeu accepteJ (by both parties} as it is held to.be the doer
or agent.'*
Reply : If the Mind were the doer, then for the perception
of pleasure &c, we should find some other instrumenVlike the
Eya foe the perception of co'our ; as no actiou can ever be
produced without an instrument. And if you agree to accept
the existence of some such organ, then there would be a difference in name only; as you would also admit the existence of a
doer (calling it J Mind ' while we call it * Self;, and a distinct
instrument (calling it something else while we call it ' Mind ')
Auother reason, why the Mind cannot be regarded as
conscious lies in the fact of its being a material substance, like
a piece of stone.
i
Question : " If consciousness does not belong to the Body,
or to the Sense-organ, or to the Mind, what does that prove
with regard to the Self ? "
Answer-, Pariceskät &c—That is to say, Consciousness being
an effect, «nust be the effect of some cause in which it would inhere ; It has been proved that it cannot iuhere in the Body,
Seuse-organs or the Mind ; and will be shown later on, nothing
eUe has the power to be the cause of consciousness; and hence
the only thing that remain*, to which Cousciouness could be
attributed, is the Self. In as much as it is a product of the
Self, it is by means of Conscious ness that the Self is cognised.
Objection: "All this is wholly irrelevant; as both the
"Self and the Consciousness haviug but momentary existence,
"there could be no such relationship between them as th*»t of
"the substratum and the contained. Specially as ' Sattva/
"' Existence/ consists in. the doing of some action towards a cer" taiu end ; and this action could be either simultaneous (>#<
'• gradual; as there is no third method which is both gradual

162

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. IV. SECTION (9).

" and simultaneous. What is gradual consists in the fact of
several useful actions being done at different times ; and simul" taoeity consists in these being done at one and the same time ;
"and between two such mutually contradictory things (as gra~
"dual and simultaneous), the absence of one would necessarily
"imply the presence of anocher. If the actions and things had
" not a merely momentary existence, there would be no gradual
"succession ; as succession would mean the cessation of one and
" the appearance of another; and if the previous thing had
" not a mere momentary but a continuous existence, then ifc
" would not be possible to set aside its existence (and as such
"both continuing to exist, there would be QO gradual succeV
" sion). On the other hand, if the existence (by which is meant
" the capability of doing a useful action) did not belong to
" the thing at any time, theu it could never hj*ve that capability
"at any time.
" I t might be argued that the gradual succession of the
" action woutd be due to the aid of gradually operating auxilliaries. ;
" But against this it is alleged that if the auxilliary does not ?
" add something to the thing itself, theu it would not be required, |
" being a useless accessory ; and if it does add something, then -1
" we ask—is this * something ' distinct from the thing itself, or j
" not distinct from it ? In the furrier case, the effect iu question |
" may be regarded, through invariable concomitance, to have 'i
" been produced by this something that comes afterwards ; and }i
" so there could be no causal efficiency belonging to the thing I
" which had been believed to have no momentary (but a con- i
• " tinuousj existence. It might be argued that the causal effi« I
" cienc) belongs to this thing ;»s accompanied by the additional |
" something brought about by the auxiliary. But if this addition .
"itself made any further addition on its own account, what;
'* form of aid would it <^ive ? On the other hand, if it were \
"to make a further addition, we would have additions ad.
1
infiaitiim ; and how would you avoid thia ? Then again, to
" a«8ert that the addition is brought about by auxilliaries, and
11

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES: Jimä.

163

" yet belongs to the momentary thing, affords an instance of rare
•* intelligence ! Nor would it be quite right to assert that the
11
addition brought about by auxiiliaries is non-difierent from
" mere existence,—there being no relationship between that
" which is not helped and that which does not help. Because
" the existence that has aiready been brought about once before
•< cannot be brought about again. It must be admitted that the
" previous existence, not consisting of the addition, ceases, and
" another existence comes about, partaking of the addition. But
"this would be an admission of momentary existence.
" Question: 'What do the auxiiliaries do for the momen«tary thing?'
* Answer: Nothing at all.
" Question: * Then why does it stand in need of them ? *
14
Answer: Who says that they are in need of them ? AM
" a matter of fact, every one of the moments having an existence
"only in its last throes, has the capability of producing.its own
"peculiar effect; and as such why should they stand in need of
"themselves ? That they approach one another is due to the
" necessity of there being some cause for the disappearance of
w
each of these, and to the existence of any combined cansftI
H
efficiency in them. And the necessity of the cause of die* appearance too is due to the very nature of things.
" Objection: ' All the causes being capable of Imaging
" about the effect, each of these would briug about a single
" effect ?'
" Reply: You must put this question to these causes themselves, which, as a matter of fact, appear tobe unable, individually, to accomplish the effect. What we do is simplj t<r
"explain what we actually find to be the case; and for this we
" cannot be censured.
"Quenion: cDo the other« produce the same effect that
* has been produced by out of t&ese causes ?' .

164

PHA<?ASTAPÄDA BÄÄ8H7A—CHAP. IV. SECTION (9).

" Answer: It is not that each of them that produces what
has been produced by another; but they produce what is
** being produced by the other.
" Question i * Wheu each of them is equally capable of {fro*
" duciog the effect/ what is the use of the others ?'
" Answer: True; but they are not intelligent agents ; and
" as such noue of them could desist from activity seeing that
" the effect had been already produced by something else,
" Objection: * That many causes bring about a single effect
" is hard to prove; as a diversity of causes would always bring
" about a diversity of effects/
u

*' Reply : It is not so; as the difference in the effects is
" do« to the difference in the attendant concomitants, and to
" that in the auxiliaries. Because it is the very fact of pro" ducing (conjointly) a single effect that constitutes the fact of
" a number of things being ' auxilliaries/
" Thus then it is only when Entities are momentary, and
" have a successive existence, one after the other, that they can
" produce any effect; and it is absolutely impossible to explain
" the gradual and successive causal operation of things having
' more than a merely momentary existence. Nor could there
" be any simultaneous operation of these latter; as the causal
" efficiency could not cease even at any subsequent time (and
" would continue to operate as long as the cause would exist).
"Objection: ' There can be no production of what has al" ready been produced ; nor is there anything to be done by
" the cause, after the effect has been produced ; as the wliola
" mass of effect has been brought about all at one* ; and hence
" there would be no causal operation and no production of the
" effect at any dubgpquent moment/
44

Re]*h '• In thftt cft8e this cause would be as good as non" ex »tent; an there would be a total abaeuce of useful actions
" (wherein lies the existence of things).
:

SPECIAL 3Ü3STANCES: Ätmä.

it>5

"Thus then there being no possibility of either simultaneity or
" succession which are both of an all-pervading character (i. e.
" exhaust betweeo themselves ,ail possible contingencies),—the
"existence becomes precluded from all that may have a more
" than momentary existence ; and as such it becomes centered
"in only momentary things. And such being the case, the
" inference of the momentary character of things becomes very
" easy : viz. That which exists is momentary, and the twelve
" Ayatana8 (vide Sarvadarganasangraka, Co well and Gough:—
"' The five organs of knowledge, the five organs of action, the
" Common sensory and the Intellect are the twelve c Seats ' or
" ' Ayitanas') exist; (therefore these are momentary}."
Page 75. ] To the above we make the following reply :—The
momentary character of things cannot be proved hy the mere foct
of their existence; as in the case of such an inference we could
form no idea of the absence of the Probans ('existence*) in the
contradictory ot the Subject.
Objection: " We have the notion that ' that which is
devoid of simultaneity and succession is non-existent as for instance, the horns of the horse/ and also that 'that which has
more than a momentary existence, is devoid of succession and
simultaneity.' And this contrary notion setting aside simultaneity and succession from ' non-momentary ' entiles,—we have
the notion of their absence or negation of existence."
Reply: Not so; the mere non-cognition of the non-momentary thing does not necessarily bring an idea of the preclusion
of' existence' from it; as it is only when we pe^cieve the existence of waW, that we have the idea of the non-existence of
Fire and Smoke. ID the same manner an idea of the absence of
existence could follow from the absence of succession and simultaneity, only when there would be a perception of the no-n momentary thing. For you, however, there is no ' non-inoii.entary' tiling.
Objection : " In the case of the ghost, we find that though
the ghost ii not actually perceived, yet we have an idea of its

166

PRA$ASTAPÄDA BHÄ8HYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (9).

preclusion from something else,—in the form that the post is
not a ghost; and so we could also have in the case in question
(even though we may oot perceive the non-momentary object).'1
Reply; That could not be ; because preclusion is cogniaable only by means of neqation; and the Negation (of one
thing) consists of the perception of something different from it;
as it is not possible without the perception of its counter-entity.
And if there were a total difference in the forms of the ghost
and the post, the "ghost" could not be precluded from the 'post/
Question : " How then have we the idea that the post is
not the gho*t ?"
Answer: In this idea we have a negation, not of relationship, but of identity ; and this could be possible only if we ad«
mitted the visibility of the ghost which was suspected to be indentical with the post,—not otherwise. As has been declared:
' all negation of identity is due to an admission of perceptibility/ The idea of the post restricted to the one form of the
post, serves as the basis of the preclusion of all things not
identical with that post. If the post were the ghost, then it
would certainly be cognised in that character; as a matter of
fact however we find that the idea of the post does not includ«
any idea of the ghost, as it does that of the ' poet'; and hence
we have the idea that the post is not the ghost
Objection : " There is nothing, either momentary or non" momentary, apart from such objects as the blue and the like.
44
As a matter of fact when the ' blue-moment' perceived by ft
" previous cognition is wrongly supposed to b% identical with the
" * biue-moment' perceived by a present cognition, then that
"' blue-moment' is spoken of as ' non-momentary ;' and when
" the two are recognised as distinct, then they are known as * mo«
" meDtary'; and the cognition of the aUence or negation of exit«
" fence is with reference to the 'blue,' this negation being brought
" about by the preclusion of simultaneity aod succession. And

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Ätmä.

167

14

if what is cognised is only the 'moment' perceived before, then it
" would either do the present useful action on the previous occa" sion, or the past useful action on the present occasion ; and
" there would be no gradual performance of actions; as the contra• dictory natures of the 'doer' and the 'non-doer' could not belong
" to oae and the same. Nor could it do all the actions on the
" previous occasion ; as in that case having no useful actions on
11
the present occasion, it would have no existence at the present
" time."
Reply: But in this case too, has any real contradictory of
the Piobans, or of the existence, been shown ? Or, has such contradictory been proved to be such as is only imposed by imagination ? In fact there is no actual contradictory; as the nonmomentary 'Blue'&c, have no real existence. Then one
who wishes to obtain from Inference a real knowledge of things,
should,—for the sake of the ascertaining of the threefold form
of the middle term, as in the case of the Inference from*'smoke/—
show that it has a such an existence in the Subject (Paksha) of
the Inference, as is only cognised by the recognised means of
knowledge, and not as a mere imaginary imposition. As a
matter of fact, there is nothing non-momentary that has such
a character, and hence there is an impossibility of the negation
(of the middle term). And this not being established, there
could not be an affirmation of it either, as an affirmation (or
positive existence) is always preceded by a negation. And
thus the Pruban8 becomes open to the fallacy of Asädftäraya
Page 76«] Then again, what haa been proved by the contrary
cognition is the absence of existence, from non-momentary
things; but how do you establish the concomitance of momentaviness and existence ? The mere preclusion of existence from
the contrary of momentariness can not prove that concomitance;
as in that case, eyen an aacUlhdra/na Probans would prove the
conclusion. The negative iuference—i. e. the inference of mere
negation—cannot be desirable for you.

168

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP IV. SECTION (9).

Objection : " When it is proved that existence cannot belong to the non-momentary, it follows as a necessary corrollary
from tliis that existence belongs to the momentary."
R-^p'y : Not so; as the mere assertion of its following as
a corroliary does not contain a statement of the reason for existence (t. e. it does not constitute the n^ce^siry Minor premiss);
and that of which the invariable concomitance with the Minor
term ('existence') has not been established can never serve as
the right Probans.
"Objection: "The contrary cognition itself will have the
" double function of proving either another proof or the invari" able concomitance (necessary for it) and of proving the cont r a r y ) ; and it would prove this with regirl to the * twelve
" Äyatanas ;' as no invariable concomitance could be cognised,
" except with reference to a certain object; *nd there is no object
•" apart from the twelve ' Äyatams ;' and when the concomitmce
" of existence with these has been recognised, there is cognition
" of morne atari ness also ; as the cognition of relationship always
"accompanies the cognition of that which is related; and thus we
" have the purposelessness of existence in the subject (major
"term) of the inference; and this would constitute a cognition
" of invariable concomitance of exUUnce in general, and would
" make the specific existence the middle term in the inference."
Reply: Not so; because there can be no cognition o{ the
generality devoid of individuals. And as for the generalities of
' moraentariness,' and 'existence' inhering in specific individual«,
that are c ^gnisel,—we find the momentariness of such things
as * blue ' and the like duly cognised ; (and these having existence), it is well said that there is a purposelessness of
'existence' I
Objection: " From the aforesaid contrary cognition we
have the cognition of the invariable concomitance of thf» preclusion of non-nxomentarin€88 and the preclusion of existence;
And from existence follows the cognition of the momentary
character of all that has the character of a substance."

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Atmd.
Reply: Not so; because there can be no identity between
two preclusions that have been assumed to be distinct from
each other, on the ground of the difference of the objects precluded ; and it has already been explained that it is identity
that forms the basis of Inference.
Objection: " In as much as there is an identity between
momentariness and existence, both of which form the integral
parts of all things, there would be an identity between these
preclusions (of non-momentariness and non-existence), that
have been recognised as identical with those."
Reply: Not so; as the identity between the two things
has not been proved by any other argument. If such identity
were already established, then there would be no need for the
contrary cognition that has been brought forward. Nor can any
thing be proved (or deduced) from the cognition of a concomitance between mere preclusions; for the simple reason that the
thing that is is wholly distinct from that which is not; and there
can be relationship between these.
Dharmottara (a Bauddha writer the author of the Nyäyabindu) has declared thus: "Having, by means of the contrary
cognition, established the necessary concomitance, (between
Existence and Momentariness), in the case of the jar, we prove
the momentariness of Sound, from its Existence ; and thus there
is a distinct use for both (the contrary cognition, and the concomitance); as both have distinct objectives (one refering to the
Jar and the other to Sound)."
To this we make the following reply: As in the case of
the jar, so in that of sound also, there could be no cessation of the
operation of the contrary cognition also; and as such the employment of any other argument would be absolutely-useless.
Nor is it impossible for a non-momentary thing to have a
useful action; as the existence of a thing consists in its capability of action whenever there are auzilliary attendants, and
not in being active independently by itself. And just as its

170

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION" (9).

auxiliaries, having their capabilities ascertained by negative
and positive concomitance, fail in,—its action duly appears ;
and hence it is quite possible for a permanent (non-momentary,)
thing to have au action appearing gradually ; specially as from a
single thing (existing at only one moment) no appearance is
possible of such an action as depends upon a number of causes.
Nor would it be right to assert that, if the thing were dependent
upon auxiliaries, then the action would appear by reason of
tue peculiar capability of these auxiliaries, and hence the activity
could not be said to belong to the thing itself. Because
an action is found to be always accompanied ,by the idea of the
appearance of the form of a certain thing doing that action.
Page 77.J If the action did not belong to the thing, then the
aeed of barley could bring about the sprout of paddy ; as the
auxiliary attendants of soil and water, are common to both(the
barely and the paddy); and there would be nothing to restrict
(the appearance of the paddy-plant to the paddy-seed). Nor do
the auxiliaries add any capability to the thing; all that they do
is merely to help it in its action. The only addition to the capability of the thing consists ia the proximity of the auxiliaries;
and the absence of these would constitute its weakness
(or incapability of action); as the action appears whenever
there is a proximity of these, and not otherwise. As for the
theory that certain moments are productive and others are
not productive (of action), this is negatived by the direct
perception of continued existence.
Objection: "This perception of continued existence is a
mistaken one, being due to the fact of the non-perception of the
difference among the successive moments, that are very much
like one another."
Reply: You prove the mistaken character of the said perception, on the strength of the momentary character of things;
and the momentary character of things you prove by the mistaken character of the said perception; and thus you fall into
the vicious circle of mutual interdependence. Nor is it right to

SPECIAL SÜBSTANC!»: Ätmd.

171

assume the production or destruction of a thin**, when there is
an absence of what have been recognised, by negative and
positive concomitance, to be the causes of such appearance and
destruction. And this would lead to the absurdity, of a destruction without oause, and also of the seed being the direct
cause of the «eed. As a matter of faot the seed producing the
seed is not produced directly from the seed,—for the simple reason that it is a seed/—-like the seed that is still upon the. stallt. o£^
the paddy plant.
It has been asserted unat the thing being impartite,
it could not possibly be both active and inactive.
But this is nothing; because a single thing in the shape
of Fire is active towards burning; and at the same time inactive towards bathing; nor does this dual character make any
difference in its form. In the same manner, a single thing could
be active, when the necessary auxiliaries would be present;
and inactive when they would be absent.
Question: " How can the proxhnity of one thing make
something eke active ? and if such activity were possible, why
should the activity brought about be of only a few things, and
not of all things?"
Answer: You. can not rightly take objection to the nature
of things. As for ourselves, whenever we find an activity
appearing at the presence of a few things, and disappearing
when these things are not present, we infer that these things
constitute the auxiliaries in the appearance of that activity ;
and certainly there can benothing objectionable in this processof reasoning. According to you also, in as much as the. plant
grows out of the seed and the damp soil, it is these and not anything else, that are regarded as the aids ; and for you ako in
this what otner reason have you except the nature of things a*
thoy are ?
Objection: " Each of these things—the ae**d, the «oil and
the watar —is capable of bringing about the action of sprouting ;

2 72

PRAgASTAPÄÖA BfiÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (9).

and they cannot be regarded as mere auxiliaries to one another."
ftzph:, How then is it that the farmer after having prepared the soil, apws the seeds, and waters it 1
Qbjection : " He does it for the purpose of bringing about
the moment of the production of the sprout, by each of these
tnree (soil &c.), as guiding the action of the other."
Jfoplif: If tbe seed alone were to appear from its caus« as
fully capable of bringing about the c moment of the production
of the sprout1.—what? would be the use of the Soil and the Water?
And if the seed were absolutely incapable of bringing it about,
then the proximity of these too would be of no avail; as this
could not make it lose its nature (natural incapability).
Objection: " What the soil and the water do is to stop the
efficiency of the seed to produce another incapable * moment/—
such efficiency existing in the ' moment-series' of the seed
itself/'
Reply: There ma> be the non-production of the incapable moment'; but any production of the capable ' moment'
would not be possible, on account of there being no cause
for this production. As a matter of fact however, there can be
no stopping of the efficiency that constitutes the very nature
of the thing. As in that case there would be a cessation of
the thing itself; and destruction comes to be brought about by
a cause (and not uncaused as the Bauddha holds all momentary destructions to be).
Then again, it is not possible that there should be produce<J in the seed, an efficiency or capability of bringing about
a particular kind of' moment; '.because it is momentary. And
if the efficiency thus produced were not something apart from
the very nature of the thing,—then that would come to the
producing of what has already been produced.
For these reasons, there can be only two alternatives: (1)
If what is produced is inefficient, then there can b« no action,

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Ätmd.

173

and (2) if it"is efficient, then it must act immediately after its
production; and the action cannot be attributed to the jproximitiy of any other thing; as this other thing could not be of
any use in this matter (as shown above).
Page 78*3 It might be argued that, " in as much as the effect
is not found to be produced from a single cause, while it is found
to be produced from a number of causes combined/together,—
we mus*; attribute causal efficiency to all these combined, and
as such why should you wander away from us who hold this
view?"
But in that case your premiss becomes inconclusive, in
at much as it is quite possible for a* non-momentary thing to
operate towards a useful end.
Objection: ^Of all such things as are produced, or brought
about by some cause, destruction is absolutely certain; and
from this we can infer their momentary character. For instance, in all things we find that that which is sure to be does
not stand in need of any cause to bring about that; e. g., the
fact of the arrow and the sword being made of iron does not
stand in need of any other cause; and the destruction of all
things is sure to be; and from this we can infer that the destruction of things does not stand in need of any other cause
(save their very being); specially as those circumstances that
are found to be due to other causes are not such as are sure to
be,—such for instance as the colouring of clothes ; so also if
things were, for their destruction, to stand in need of causes
other than those that bring them into existence,—then, in as
much aa there might be certain discrepancies in those dther
eausei or some obstacle in their operation, it might ao happen
that some produced thing might not be destroyed at all. Whereas things being produced by their «»uses aa amenabU to destruction, tfyey become destroyed aa soon as they are produced ;
and this- establishes the momentary character of all things.
Then again, if a thing ware not destructible by its very nature,

174

PRA?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. W. SECTIOff {*).

then its destruction could never be brought about; it would be
as impossible as the cooling of are; and if it be destructible hy
it* nature, there would be no need for any cause» for its destruction. Nor can destruction, which is noa-differeut from &he> Iking
itself, be ever regarded as brought about by another cause 'r
as a difference in causes would make a difference in the effects
(and hence destruction would not be identical with the thing).
If the Destruction weie something different from the thing,
and were brought about by a different cause, then we would have
the absurd possibility of a negation being perceived; and in aa
much as the appearances of one thing (Destruction) could not
do away with the form of another thing (the thing believed to
be destroyed), we could have no such declaration as ' the jar
is destroyed/ with a positive thing for its Nominative; instead of
that we should have the assertion, ' Negation is produced.' And
then if a question of fact be put to as, as to what beearae of
the ' jar/ —though we would really have its cessation, yet in
what way oould we assert it ? For these rewtom wo conctad*
that things are destructible by their very nature/'
To the above we make the following reply : when a thing
is produced, does it stay for a single moment, or does it stay
for any other moment also ? In the latter case, its momentary
character disappears, as it would stay for more than one moment!
And in the former case, it would have no existence at any other
moment save the one at whicn it is produced ; and hence tnere
would be no identity between its existence and non-existence,
as they would exist at different points of time.
It might be urged that what is meant is not that a thing
is its own destruction, but that the second moment is the destruction or non-existence of the preceding moment.
Page 79] But there is not much in this theory either;'be*
cause even though one moment differs from another moment,
M an individual unit of time, yet there is no actual contradiction or opposition in their nature. Just as one jar exiits along

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Atmä.

175

with another jar,—i. <?., in your phraseology, the jar of one "series"
exists side by side with the jar of another "series "—so might
it also exist along with anothei jar of the same " series/'
Specially as the means of cognition pertaining to the second
moment having served its purpose with regard to the positive
form of that moment, it could not have any efficiency towards
the negation of the previous moment. As for ' Negation,' it
only consists in the negation of a certain positive thing, as it»
is always conprehended in the form, ' the jar is not/ Hence
its appearance means the cessation of that thing ; its continuance
or existence means the discontinuance of the thing ; as the
two—the jar and its negation—are mutual contradictories.
Such being the case, momentary character cannot belong to
any thing; specially as its negation or absence, which always
appears after sometime, and is dependent upon some other
cause, is always fouud to come after the thing itself. As for existence we fiud that when the jar has been produced, it is long
before it is destroyed by the stroke of the stick. Nor does it
stand to reason to assert that, " the destruction of the jar is of
a positive character, and what the stroke of the stick does is to
produce the ' series' of broken pieces of earthenware (into
which the jar is reduced)." Because the thing (jar) having bound
together within its own series, the potency of producing like
things of the same series,—as long as this potency is not destroyed, there can be no production of a heterogeneous series;
and if you admit of the destruction of that potency by the
same stroke of the stick, why should you object to the destruction
of the thing itself ?
Even though a negation be brought about by a cause,
thai fact alone would not make it an entity ; as it is directly
perceived by the senses to have the character of a negation of
entity. Its very nature is such that even though caused, it
is not destroyed, like a positive entity; as that which has been
destroyed is never again perceived (and it would be this perception that would constitute the destruction ofthat destruc-

176

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. IV, SECTION (9).

tion). And if the nature of things, cognised by the righo
means of knowledge, were to be set aside, simply oo the ground
of its similarity with something else,—then the diversity of
the universe would also have to be set aside.
The argument—" how can the production of one thing
make another thing lose its character ?"—would not be a proper one to bring forward ; as the statement, ' the jar has been
destroyed/ is due to the production of its negation, through the
action of its constituent parts ; hence it is a negation of the
jar alone, and not of all things ; For this negation there is no
material cause; and for this reason it has no non-material
cause either. As to the question—" where have you seen any
effect without a substratum ? "—we see such an efifect in this
very case ; as the negation cannot inhere in the jar, which has
been destroyed; nor does it inhere in the Earth; as being a
property of something else it could not inhere in it.
Question: " How then is it that it is found to Be perceived in a definite place ?"
Answer : That is due to the definite place being occupied
by its counter-entity. It is its nature that on the negation of
something connected with it, it appears as this latter thing ; and
that on the negation of something inhering in it, it appears
in the form of the latter; its qualification also is such; and
it has no conjunction or inherent relationship ; as these two
latter belong to positive entities.
Thus has been proved the existence of Negation. There
is no such thing cognisable by the intellect as is contrary in its
nature to Bhäva (positive existence), and which could bring,
about a contradiction between Ice and Fire. As a matter irf
fact, the only contradiction that exists between Ice and Fire
consists in the absence of Fire in Ice, and vice versa; and
there is no contradiction between their forms; as a positive
entity can never have another positive entity for its contradictory.

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Ätma.

\ 77

Page SO-] It has been urged that negation being sure to come
about it .could not stand in need of any other cause. But we find
this argument failing in the case of the rising and setting of
the Sun : and if these did not depend on any causes, then there
would be no diversity of Time. The same objections would
also apply if we were to make the negation concomitant with
the appearance of any one accessory detail; in the case of the
cloth we find that there is a definite cause of colouring, which
also appears #at a definite time; and in this case the mere
non-proximity or absence of that time would necessarily- mean
the non-production of colour. In the case of negation however
we find that there are endless causes for bringing it about, and ail
are timed to appear at particular points of time ; and it being
impossible for every one of these causes and points of tim« to be
absent, and one or the other of these is sure to appear; and
appearing at any other time, it at once, in a moment destroys
the positive Entity; and thus negation comes to be produced.
And even though the destruction is caused, yet it is permanent.
Then again, all the above arguments brought forward to
prove the momentary destruction of all things, are open to the
fallacy of " Kal.Uyayäpadiskta" ; as we find that what has
been once seen is again cognised, in the same form, by the
recognitive perception.
Objection : "This cognition cannot prove the fact of the
positive entity having an existence before and after—i. e. a
continuous existence ; because the cognition of the object
(now, and that after sometime) cannot be regarded as one
and the same cognition ; as there is no cause for any such continuous cognitioa; because the sense-organ operating upon
objects that are near us, could not be said to belong to the
past time; and as for the impression produced by a previous
cognition, it is restricted to that particular cognition, and does
not apply to any other time ; and apart from these two there
is nothing pertaining to both times, which could produce tho cog-

178

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA--CHAP. IV. SECTION (ft).

nition in question. Then again, for the following reason too,
the cognition cannot be one and the same ; because they are
of totally different natures; th<p object perceived by the senses is
known as " this," while that whiefai is not so cognised is spoken
of as " that"; and the character of $ense-perceptibüity is
directly opposed to that of imperceptihility; and as such they
could never be regarded as one and the same cognition ; hence
we must accept the two cognitions—being as they are of the
nature of direct ferwption and remembrance—to Jiave wholly
distinct objectives."
To the above we make the following reply:—We distinctly
recognise the fact of there existing a certain positive entity
extending over the present as well as the past and the future ;
and then, to deuy that that object is not tke objective of the
two cognitions would be a contradiction of direct cognition ; as
in that case the object of remembrance would not be the same
as that whioh had been previously perceived. For these rea- I
sons the whole must be regarded as a single cognition, which,
on the strength of our distinct cognition, should be accepted as
having both (the past and the present) for its object. For a ]
distinctly cognised effect learned people always assume adequate I
causes, even though these latter be not distinctly cognisable.;!
and they never conceal or set aside the slightest or the most un- J
desirable effect, on the ground of the non-perception of its |
cause ; as if they were to do so, then there would be a setting!
aside of the whole worldly phenomenon, (the cause whereof
w« ar« never able to directly perceive). Hence, though the
Sense-organ, or the Impression, each by itself, is incapable of
bringing about the said combined cognition, yet when com-j
bined, the two together would bring about the single effect in
the shape of recognition. And on account of the capabilities
of the two causes, this recognition would have both (the pas^
and the present) fur its object; and it would attain the character'
of 'aensuouH' cognition, because of its following upon the]
efficiency of the fense-organ and the capability of the objecti

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES: Atmä.
The mere fact of each of the two causes beiag separately incapable of bringing about a particular effect cannot be a ground
for denying the capability of these also when combined ; as
for iustance, though we find each of the three causes, the soil,
water and the seed singly incapable of bringing about the
sprout, yet they do bring it about when put in touch with one
another. It is a well-recognised fact that in a case where we
have peculiar auxiliaries to the cause, the effect produced is
also of a peculiar character.
Consequently there would be. nothing incompatible in
one and the same object being both perceptible and imperceptible, according as it happens to be or not tobe, in proximity
to the person perceiving. It is for this reason that even when
there is no actual contact with the sense-organs, the cognition of something in the past is',always' sensuous ' cognition, as
it has for its object a cognition brought by {.he sense-organs (on
tht previous occasion); and because * sensuousnesa ' lies only in
that (being produced by the sense-organs). The sense-organ
cognising that which is not before us, cognises the fact of its
having occurred at some time past, and that which is to appear
in the future ; as in the case of this latter, the S nse-orgao is
without the aid of the accompanying Impr$$sion (which is
present in the case of the cognition of the past). Nor is there
any incompatibility in the same cognition applying to both
points of time (the present and the past); and as such there
can be no reason for attributing to such a cognition the character of ' Kalpand y (assumption or imagination). Because we
have often seen a single thing having many qualifications ; e. o\
in the case of a person, Caitra, being qualified by (possessing)
an umbrella and a book. Nor would there be any difference
between the two cases, on the ground of the relationship of the
umbrella and the book appearing at one ami the same time,
and that of the two points of time bting gradual, appoanng
one after the other; as the fact of one thing being cognised as
having two qualifications would bo common to the two cases.

180

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION" (9).

Thus then, we find that Recognition comprehends an
object extending over diverse points of space and time ; and as
sucii it does away with the idea that all things are undergoing
momentary productions and destructions. Nor can this recognition be regarded as mistaken ; as we cannot find it being
set aside by subsequent cognition to the contrary. It might
be urged that it is set aside by all those arguments that have
been brought forward to prove the momentary destruction of
things. But all these arguments being inferential in their
character could have a footing only when the contrary sensuous
cognition would be set aside; and you seek to set aside
this sensuous cognition by means of those same arguments; and
certainly this affords an example of a curious mutual interdependence. This is not the case with Sense-cognition, which is
independent of other forms of knowledge. In the case of such
things a3 the Flame and the. like, the sense-cognition that we
have has for its object the generality 'Flame'; while the In-]
fereatia] knowledge is that of an individual fire ; and as such
there being no contradiction between the two, in such cases the
sensuous cognition is not an obstacle in the appearance of the]
Inferential cognition.
J
Some people with extreme boldness have declared that the
fact of all things undergoing momentary destruction is directly
perceptible by the senses. And against these people we bring
forward the very fact of there bei^g no such cognition at alLJ
That is to say, the cognition that we have is in the form of 'thisi
is blue/ and not as ' this is momentary.*
|
Objection : " The raomentariness of the blue object is concomitant with its blueness; and it has got no separate functioning (and existence); consequently when blueness would be
perceived, momentariness would also be cognised along with it]
and the reason why it is not always recognised as such is that
we do not always perceive the differences between the successive
moments offche thiog's existence (and hence we regard tlii
thinj* irsolf as having a continual existence)."
j

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Atmä.

181

Reply; What a wonderful stretch of philosophic insight!
You are explaining a fact of actual cognition, and yet you say
it is not perceived ! The hope that that which is not perceived
is cognised is as false as a mirage ; and no-one admits of any
other necessary condition in the sense-perceptibility of an object,
save the cognition brought about by the force of sense-perception. And when of two things we find that the cognition of
one does not mean the cognition of another, the assertion of an
identity between these is a misnomer.
Objection: " The Sensuous cognition is momentary ; and as
"such it could apply to only such existence of the object as
" would be coeval with itself; it would also set aside the fact
'• of that object being not related to that point of time; as also
"the relationship of that object, which is concomitant with
" that poiut of time, with any other point of time; and thus that
" momentary cognition must be accepted as apprehending the
" fact of that object having existence only for that time,—which
"means that it is momentary/1
Reply: In putting forward this argument you show yourself to be in a sorry plight similar to ti*e drowning man catching
at a straw. How could the cognition apprehend the fact of the
object being coeval with itself, when it does not apprehend itself ?
Or, even granting that it does not apprehend it, then too no sensecognition would apply to the notion that the object did not
exist before, and will not exist after, the moment at which it
is perceived; because Sense-cognition is never found to operate
towards either the past or the future; applying as it does to
the present time, it could not preclude all time that is not
present; a3 there is a distinct contradiction between the present
and the rton-present; but the fact of cognising aa object
aa present does not necessarily preclude its relationship to any
other point of time; as there is no incompatibility in a siugle
object being related to various points of time, iu the same
manner as a single thread is connected with a uumber of beads.

] 82

PRAgÄSTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (9).

This has been explained by us ia detail in the Tattvcvprabodka,
and the Tattvasamvädini; and hence we do not repeat here
what we have already explained there.
Page 82.] Then again, if all entities w e r e momentary, to
whom would birth and rebirth belong ?
Obj: "They would belong to the 'series of cognitions."
Reply : Tins cannot be; because the * series' can have no
existence apart from that of which the series is formed.
Objection : " Birth-and-rebirth does not cousist in any one
thing (Soul) becoming connected with many bodies; what is
meant by it is the non-cessation of the series of cognitions; and
this would be quite compatible with the momentary character
of things/1
Reply : There is not much to recommend ia this explanation either; because there is no proof for accepting the cogni«
tions of the child in the embryo as having their cause in the
cognitions of the previous birth; as it is not necessary that the
effect must proceed from a cause which is of the same kind as !
itself; as we find smoke «arising from fire, which is not of the j
same kind as the smoke.
Objection: " When of two thing3 we find that the existences
or non-existence of the one depends upon the existence or
non-existence and other peculiarities of the other, then we re-;
gard this latter to be of the same kind (homogeneous) with, and)
the material cause of, the other. And as a matter of fact, we ••;
find that cognition has the peculiar characteristic of being off
the nature of consciousness ; this characteristic we find absent i
in the material substances, Earth &c; hence the homogeneous >|
cause of cognition must be something possessed of this characteristic nature; and from this we infer that the cognition of
the child in the embryo must be due to another preceding cog-f
nition ; otherwise if the effect were not necessarily concomitant'
with its cause, then it would appear in a haphazard manner." ^

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES: ktmä.
Reply : There is not much in this either; as we find the
burning characteristic of fire appearing out of the rubbing of
two pieces of stick, which are not possessed of that characteristic ; and from the unconscious Eye we find appearing cognitions
having the character of consciousness; and hence we have no
ground for necessarily postulating such a cause for cognition
as would have the characteristic of consciousness ; and hence
the existence of a previous birth could not be established if all
things were regarded as momentary.
Nor would it be possible to prove the existence of future
birth: as there would be no ground for believing that the last
cognition of the body would bring about, or transmit, any further cognition.
Objection: "That which necessarily brings about the
effect is the cause in its fully developed condition; as we find
in the" case of the seed which always produces the sprout, when
its causal efficiency is complete; and in the same manner, in
as much as the last cognition of the body would have its full
efficiency of producing further cognitions, it would surely bring
about further cognitions;—in this we have got very good
grounds for admitting of a continuous series of cognitions."
Reply: Not so; because we do not find any such efficiency
in the final flickering of the flame, (which is not found capable
of bringing about any further flickerings).
Objection: '• In the case of the flame the absence of the
efficiency is due to the destruction or expansion of the oil and
5
the wick (which circumstances are not present in the case of
the Cognition)."
|
Reply: In the case of the last cognition also, its causal
» efficiency would be destroyed by the pangs of death. And hence
; no birth or rebirth would be explicable in accordance with the
I momentary character of things.
The author brings forward other arguments to prove the
existence of the Self:—^artrasamavcLyinibkyam Sec. That is to

184

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (9). •

say, from the activity and cessation from activity of the body,
we infer the existence of an intelligent Guider or Master of the
Body, who makes the necessary effort. In order to preclude
the activity of the Creeper &c, the author has added—' inhering in the body ' ; and for the purpose precluding the moving
and not-moving of the dead body in a current of water, he has
added—* Capable of acquiring and avoiding the desirable and
the undesirable respectively' ; the ' desirable ' is Pleasure; and
the ' undesirable' is Pain; and the acquiring of Pleasure and the
avoiding of pain indicate such activity as is prompted by intelligence.
Page 8 3 ] The author cites an instance—" Just as we infer the
guiding charioteer from the motion of the chariot" That is to
say, (1) the activity, capable ofucquiring and avoiding the desirable and uudesirable, through the accepting and rejecting of the
means leading to those experiences, must be regarded as due to
a preceding effort,—because it is a particular kind of activity,—
like the activity of the chariot; (2) or, the Body is controlled
by ao intelligent agent,—because it has a peculiar action,—like
the chariot.
' PränädibhUca'—The connection is that from the
actions of Breathing &c, also we infer the existence of the
intelligent controller. This refers to ail such actions as, Breathing up, Breathing down, the closing and the opening of Eyes,
living, mental activity, and the modifications undergone by the
sense-organs; as also Pleasure, Pain, Desire, Aversion and
Effort,—all of these being indicative of the existence of the Self.
With a view to show in what way these are indicative of
the Self, the author proceeds to show, first how Breathing up
and down is indicative of it: &arirapärigrh%tah <&c— Air has
the character of blowing horizontally; but in the case of the
Air, enclosed in the body, however, we find it moving up and
down vertically,—in a manner contrary to its ordiuary nature;
and from this we infer the existence of a controller of the Body,

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Ättna.

I35

who makes the Air move in that manner ; as otherwise we could
not account for such an action of the air, contrary to its natural
modes of motion. The instance cited is that of the blower of the
bagpipe. The argument may be simply stated thus: The Body is
controlled by an intelligent agent,—because it is the receptacle oi
such air as has its a,ctiou modified by the desire of some one,—
just like the bagpipe. The qualification ' Qiiriraparigrhitak'
indicates the precedence of intelligent desire; and hence the
argument is not invalidated by such instances as those of the
* Dvivdyuka' and the like. (' Dlvdyuka ' is the name given to
the phenomenon of the rising up of the whirlwind caused by the
collision of two contrary winds).
The closing and opening of the Eyes indicates a controlling
agency, of the same kind as the propeller of the pulley» That
is to say, the action bringing about the conjunction of the
upper lid with the lower is called ' nimesha'; and that which
brings about their separation is called * unmesha1; and from
this action we infer a controlling intelligent agent for the
Body who would act like the propeller of the pulley. Io as
much as the propelling up and down of the pulley could be
brought about by the action of the wind also (as in the case
of the wind-mill).—in order to preclude this, the author has
added 'niyatena in a fixed manne**, which implies dependence
upon someone-3 desire. The argument may be thus stated :
The body is controlled by an intelligent agent,—because it has
as its constituents such parts as are moved up and down by
desire—like the pulley.
The author next puts forward an argument that proves the
existence of Life: Dehasya So. * Vrddhi' is growth; thisand the filling up of wounds being due to some intelligent
controller, we infer the existence of such an intelligent controller or mender for the Body, who would be similar to- 4he
master repairing his house. That is to say, the growth- o£
the body and the filling up of its wounds must he- regarded?

J&Q

PltAQASTAPÄDA BHASHYA—CHAP. V. SECTION (9).

as being brought about by an intelligent agent,—because
they have the character of growth and filling up of wounds,—
like the growing or increase and repairing of the house. Nor
would the growing of trees &c., invalidate this argument; as
the growth of these also is brought about by God.
Suqh things as the tree anil the like have no souls ; as in
the case of these we do not find any connection with souls with
the qualification of producing the various fuucuonmgs of the
Intellect &c.
The author now puts forward the inferential argument
based upon mental activity—A ultimata d"c. That is to say, the
existence of the Self in the body is indicated by the action of
the mind that brings about its connection with the eyes aod
the other organs of perception, which apprehend objects desired
to be perceived. The urger or propeller of the Mind is inferred
to be like the boy propelling one ball against another fixed in
a corner of the room, (the fixed ball resembling the Eye, the
propelled ball the Mind, and the Boy the St.-lf). That is to say,
the Mind is propelled by an intelligent agent,—because it is the
substratum of an action bringing about the counection with a
desired object,—like the ball in the boy's hand. That which
would be propelled by non-intelligent agencies of the wind and the
like, would bring about connection with undesirable things also*
Page 84.J " Nayanavishaya &c\—as a matter of fact we often
rind that after the perception of colour, the object of vision, we find
certain modifications in the organ of taste, following upon the
remembrance o!' the taste of the object seen ; and from this we
infer that there is a single agent who cognises both Colour
and Taste, by means of the two organs, resembling a person
looking through two openings in the window. That is to say, when
we seo the colour of a nico fruit which we like, we have a remembrance of its taste perceived on some previous occasion ;
this remembrance produces in us a desire to eat the fruit; this
ifl followed by an effort towards obtaining it; and this effort,

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES: Ätmä.
chrough the contact; of the self and the mind, produces a modification iu the organ of taste, in the form of making saliva flow
from the roots of the teeth; this flow of saliva could not be due
to auy intelligence in the sense-organ itself; as each of the LWO
organs concerned perceives only the colour aud the taste respectively; and heace the seeing of Colour could not bring any remembrance of the Taste ; as a matter of fact however we do find this
modification appearing in the organ of Taste ; and hence there
must be some one apart from the organs, who cognises both, and
who on seeing the Colour, remembers the Taste (perceived by
himself on a previous occasion). Nor could the body itself be
taken as the cogniser of both ; because the young body being
universally recognised to be different from the old body, on
account of the difference in size, any thing perceived in
boyhood could not be remembered in old age.
Not for the above reasons alone, but also because of the
properties of the Pleasure, Pain, Desire, Aversion and Effort,
which lead to the inference of something to which these properties belong,—all these qualities are cognised as co-extensive
with the notion of I'—being always cognised as 'I am pleased,'
'I am pained' and the like, where we find that it is the object' I '
which is characterised by Pleasure. The notion of * I ' could not
refer to the body; because it is not found to apply to the
body of another person. Nor could it be said to apply to
one 8 own body alone. Because one body, as a body, does not
differ from another body. If the notion of * I ' referred to the
Body, then just as another's man's body being as perceptible
as our own body,—the notion of fatness appearing equally with
reference to both,—the other man's body would also be capable
of being spoken of as ' I ' ; specially as in both, tho shape is the
same. If it be held that there is* a difference between the two on
account of the characters of things related to them,—then, the
notion of * I ' would come to apply to these things, and not to the
Body. Then again, if the notion of ' I ' referred to the Body,
it could not appear in our consciousness as something internal.

] 88

PRA<?ÄSTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. V. SECTION <9).

For the same reasons the notion of ' I ' could not refer to
the Sense-organs; as these organs are themselves beyond senseperception; while the notion of * I ' is of the nature of Sense-cognition,—being independent of inferential marks as well as of
verbal expression.
For the same reason, Pleasure &c, also could not belong
either to the Body or to the Sense-organs. Then again, it is a
fact known by all men that to him alone who is the experiencer or cogniser, belong Remembrance, Desire, Aquiring
of the means of pleasure, Feeling of Pleasure, Avoidance of
Paio, and so forth ; and it has already been proved that Cognition and Remembrance do not belong either to the Body or to
the Sense-organs ; and hence it follows that Pleasure &c., also
cannot belong to them.
Page 8 5 ] The author brings forward another reason : Prade$avrttitvät. That is to say, we actually see that the qualities of
Pleasure &c, exist only over a part of their substratum,—for
instance, we have such ideas as c I feel pleasure in my feet,' f I
feel a pain in my head;' and from this it follows that they
cannot be the properties of the Body or the Sense-organa ; as it
differs essentially from the specific properties of these latter,
which are found to pervade over the whole of their substrates.
The argument may be thus simplified in the form of a negative
Inference: Pleasure &c, are not the specific properties of the
Body or the Sense-organs,—because they exist only in parts
of their substrates, while the specific properties of the body
and the sense-organs have always been found to pervade the
whole of their substrates,—e.g., Colour and the rest;—Plea»
sure &c, however do not thus pervade over the whole of their
substrates,—and hence they cannot be the properties of the
Body or the Sense-organs. Nor could the case of Sound be an
exception invalidating the above premiss ; as though Sound is a
property of Akd^a (over the whole of which it could not pervade),
yet it appears as the property of that portion of Äkß$a which is

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Ätmä.

Ig9

enclosed within the cavity of the Ear, over the whole of which
it certainly pervades.
For the following reason also Pleasure &c, could not be the
properties of the Body or the Sense-organs:—Because they do
not last as along as their substrates. The case of Colour may
be cited as an instance to the contrary. In fact this argument
could not apply to the case of the sense-organs; because the
premiss would be invalidated by the case of the organ of hearing,
which has its property, sound, such as does not *xist as long as
the organ itself.
Another reason, why Pleasure &c, could not be properties of
the Body or the Sense-organs, is that they are not perceptible
by any of the external Sense-organs. The qualities of
the Body and Sense-organs are of two kinds—(1) some,
like gravity and the like, are imperceptible, and (2) some, like
Colour &c, are perceptible by the external sense-organs. In
the case of pleasure &c, however we find that they do not come
within any of the two categories (being perceptible, but not by
any of the external Sense-organs); and hence these cannot be
the properties of the Body or the Sense-organe.
And thus it being proved that Pleasure &c, cannot belong
to the Body and the Sense-organs, the Self is the only
substance left to which they could belong.
Objection: " Pleasure and Paiu are modifications ; and as
such could not belong to the Self which is eternal (and hence
unmodifiable). And even if they could belong to it, then that
Self (being modifiable) would become non-eternal, like fche
skin."
Reply: Not so; because the production and destruction
(appearance and disappearance) of these could not cause any
disturbance in the form of the Self. In the case of all eternal
things, we do not admit of any destruction or change of its
forth; and as for the disappearance of one quality (Pleasure)

190

PRACASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. V. SECTION (9).

and the appearance of another (Pain) in connection with it,—
there would be no incongruity in this.
Question : <c What do Pleasure and Pain do to the eternal
Self?"
Answer : They afford to it an experience with regard to
themselves.
Question : "What good could this experience do to one that
is free from all addition or substraction (i. e.r want and its
supply) ?"
Answer: The good done consists ia this that it is on
the strength of such experience that it becomes an enjoyer or
experiencer of Pleasure and Pain.
Tathäham^abdenäpi.—That is to say, just as the Self is
inferred from Pleasure &c, so also is it inferred from the notion
of * L' We find the word * I ' used in the Veda as well as^in
ordinary parlance, by learned persons; and this word could
not be without something that it would denote. Its own
form could not form its denotatioo, as that would involve the
incongruity of its operation bearing upon itself; as has been well
declared—" DO word ever denotes itself." And hence that
something which ia denoted by the word * I ' would be the Self.
Objection: "The word ( I ' may be regarded as denoting
the earth etc."
In reply to this our author says—Prthivyddigabdavyatirekdt That is to say, that which denotes one thing is always
found to be co-extensive with other words denoting the same
thing, as we find in the case of the words 'Substance* ('Dravya')
1
Earth ' (' Prthivi) and the like. Page 8 6 ] In the case of
the word T however we find that it is not co-extensive
with the other words denoting the Earth &c.; as we never
come across such expressions as ' aham prthivi7 (' I am
Earth'), €aham udakarri (' I am water') &c; hence the
word ' I ' could not be taken as applying to the Earth ke.

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES: .Una.
Objection : " The word ' I ' is found to be applied to the
Body ; in such expressions as 4 Sthülökam,' 'I am fat.'
Reply: Not so ; because we find it used in such expressions
as * A kam jänämi' (' I know '), v akani smavdmi' (' I remember ' ) ; and it has been shown that knowledge and remembrance
do not belong to the Body. Hence its use with regard to the
Body must be regarded as secondary or figurative, based
upon the fact of the Body being a useful instrument for the
Self; in the same way as the master says of his useful servant—
1
he is ray very self;'
The existence of the Self having been thus established, the
author next proceeds to point out its qualities—Tasya ca gwidh
&c. He theu points out the authority of the Sutras on the
point of Intellect «fee, belonging to the Self; ÄtmalingädhiJcdre <fcc, which refers to the Sütras-Prdnäpäna t&e.
Dharmädharmau <kc—That is to say, the existence of
Dkarma and Adkarma in the Self is indicated by the declaration in the SiUra—' Dkannädkarman dtmdntaragunävämakäranatuät.' Tbe sease of this is this : Some people hold that the
Dharma of giving, inhering in the given thing, produces a Dkarma
in the receiver of the gift ; and this view the author of the »Sutra
has repudiated in the Sutra—'AtmäntaragunänämätmäntaragiLnethvakaranatvat.' That i« to say, in the case of pleasure we
find that the pleasure of one Self does not produce ßueh qualities
io another Stflf; and hence the Dharma and Adharma of one
Self could not be the cause of the like qualities in another Self;
and this distinctly indicAtee the fact of Dkarma and
Adkarma, being the properties of the Self; as otherwise the
said aon-productiveness of these could not be asserted on the
ground of their similarity to Pleasure and other qualities of
the Self.
Satiskdrak smrityutpattau.
This refers to the Sutra
dealing with Remembrance—* Atmamanasoh sariskdrat.' That

192

PRA£ASTAPÄJDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. V. SECTION (9).

is to say, what is remembered is something cognised before ; but
the cause of this remembrance could not be that previous cognition, which will have been long destroyed; nor could the
absence of that cognition be the cause of remembrance; as
' absence' being equally present everywhere, there would be
no such diversity as ' strong ' and 'weak' in the cause of remembrance; and there would be no need for repitition (as the means
of bringing about Remembrances). Hence it must be admitted
that the previous cognition produces a certain faculty in the
Self, which gives rise to the Remembrance; and hence the postulating 01 this Faculty or Samkara.
Some people hold the cognition itself, even though it has
ben destroyed^ to be the cause of Remembrance; and in the
opinion of these people, the Jjothshtoma and the like also
would bring about the results in the shape of Heaven, without
any intervening agency, in the shape of Adrshta, of which
thus there'would be no need at all.
Vyavasthävacanäcca sankhyä—We have the Sutra
Nänatmänö vyavyasthätah': this Sutra points out the multiplicity of Selves ; and that shows that multiplicity of number is one of its properties.
Now what is meant by this ' Vyavasthd' ? It means the
non-recognition of the cognitions and pleasure &c. belongiug to
several persons. That is to say, in the case of our own pleasure
&c. we have the recognition, in old age, of our experiences of
the past, as our own ; as we often have the idea—* I enjoyed
such and such a pleasure' and the like ; and if the experience
were one and the same in all bodies, then we could have a simitar idea with reference to the experiences of other parsons: as
a matter of fact however we have no such recognition; and
from thia we infer that there is a distinct Self in each body.
Page 87. Objection: " Just as in the case of Äkäca we
find that though it in one ouly, yet on account of the diversity
of the limitations in the shape of the Ear-c&yities, we have a

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : kmä.
diversity in the sound-experiences—so, in the case of the one
Seif also we may explain the diversity of experiences as being
due to the diversity ia the limitations of the body &c."
Reply: The instance is not quite analogous ; the diversity
of sound-experience might well be explained as due to the
diversity of sound-comprehending agencies of the Ear-cavity
and the rest which have been brought about by the Dharma and
Adharma, which again are restricted to each individual person. In
the case ot the One Self on the other hand, there would be no diversity in the Adharma and Dharma (since all these wouidbeiong
to one and the same Self) ; and as such there being no diversity
in the bodies (which are brought about by the Dharma and
Adharma of the Self ensouling the body),—what would be the
cause of the diversity of the pleasure and pain experienced by
different persons ? specially as the Self being one, the contact of
the Mind also would be common to all persons. For one however,
who admits of many Selves, even though all Selves, being omnipresent, would be present in all bodies, yet his experiences
would not be common to ail of them; as each of them would experience only such pleasures &c, as would appear in connection
with the particular body that will have been brought about by
the previous Karma of that Self,—and not those belonging to
the other bodies. And the Karma also belongs to that Self by
whose body it has been done. Hence the restriction of body is
due to the restriction of Karma and vice versa,—the mutual
interdependence going on endlessly (and hence not objectionable.)
It might be held that though the Supreme Self is one
only, the human Selves being many and different from one
another, that would account for the diversity in question.
But this would not be righe, as if the human Selves would
be different from the Supreme Self, then that would mean an
abandonment of the Monistic VedXnta theory ; and also because
such a theory would go against the identity of the humafc Selves
with the Supreme Self, as laid down in the Qruti passage—'

194

PRACASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA--CHAP. V. SECTION (9).

I differentiate names and forms by entering with this Jlva
ivkich is my own self!
It might be argued that, " the difference between the
Supreme and the human Selves may be explained as being due
to Ignorance ; and the differentiations of Ignorance with regard
to th e human Selves are beginningless."
But whose ' Ignorance ' is this ? Is it of Brahma, or of the
human Selves ? It could not belong to Brahma; as That is
by Its very nature pure and intelligent. And if it belonged to
the humau Selves, then tbere would be an interdependence,—
differentiation of human selves being due to Ignorance, and
this latter belonging to the differentiated human selves.
Objection: " The differentiations of Ignorance and human
Selves would be endless, like the differentiation of the seed and
tl^e tree ; and as such the said interdependence or reciprocity
would not be objectionable."
Reply: There is a real difference between the seed and the
tree ; whereas the difference between Ignorance and the human
Self is not real; so the cases are not quite analogous. And the reciprocal causability also in the case of the seed and the tree is due
to the real difference among the several seeds and trees, (one seed
being the cause of one tree, which briugs forth another seed,
and so forth); the human Self however is one and the same
through all the states that it passes through in its course of
metempsychosis—viz : the states of the bird, the quadruped and
the man ; as in each of these we find that no sooner is the infant born than it evinces^ a desire for the kind of food suited
to the species in which it happens to be born ; and such desire
could only be due to the series of experiences of its previous
births ; this shows that its Self has had a beginningless connection with bodies; and in this case, it would not be quite
reasonable to hold the differentiation of Selves to be due to
Ignorauce, and this Ignorance to belong to the human Self.

195

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Atmä.

Objection: "The humaaJSelf also, like Brahma, is beginning leas and endless, being a mere reflection of Brahma; and
hence on the strength of the texfc—' all things shine after that
shines, and all this shines by Its light' &c., we hold that it is
the endless and beginningless essence of Brahma that appears
in ail bodies.'*
Reply : That is not right; as if such were the case, then
the diversity in question would be absolutely inexplicable.
Hence it was quite right for the author of the Sutra to declare—' NäncLtmäno vyavasthdtali'; and as for the texts laying
down the non-difference of Selves, they must be taken as figurative.
Page 88.] According to the theory of the multiplicity of Selves
there would be no such absurd contingency as the cessation of
the worldly process, on the emancipation of all human selves..
As the number of such selves beiug endless, there would be no
end of them; nor any decrease or increase of their number. As
has been declared by the revered author of the Värtika:—"Thua
then the knowing ones being continuously emancipated, there
does not become a void (of selves), in as much as the number
af1 these in the universe is endless ; if there were an eud, or
an increase and decrease in their number, then alone could
such a void be possible,—as in the case of things of limited
dimensions ; when however the thing is illimitable, there is no
possibility of these (end &c.)"
Prthaktvamapyata evak That is to say, the assertion
* nänätmäno dec.' also indicates the ' separateness ' of Selves ;
since Separateness always follows from Number.
The assertion in the Sutra ' Tathä cätmä ' indicates the
Greatest Dimension as belonging to Selves. That is to say,
having said that Akdga is all-pervading, the Sutra adds ' so is
the Self also ;' and this clearly indicates that the Self like
Akäga, is ail-pervading; and hence its dimension must be the

196

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄ3HYA—CÖAP. V. SECTION (9).

greatest possible. The all-pervading character of the Self itf
inferred from the upward flaming of fire, and the horizontal
blowing of Air ; since both of these must be due to certain unseen forces ; oor could this unseen force be wholly unconnected
with the receptacle of these (Fire and Air) ; as in that case
there would be no restriction in such actions (i. e. anything
or everything would flame upward and blow horizontally).
Nor is it possible for the unseen force inhering in the Self to
be directly connected with any other substance ; hence it comes
to this that the Fire and Air are connected with that (body)
which is connected with the substratum of the unseen force ;
and this establishes the fact of the Self being connected with
all material substances; this constitutes its all-pervading
character.
Objection: " The upward flaming of the Fire, is due to its
nature; and not to auy unseen forces."
Reply: What do you mean by this 'nature of the Fire' ? Is
it 'hahnitva1 (firemss), or 'dähakatva' (' burning character J)
or 'a particular colour' ? If it were any of these, then we would
have this nature in the red hot iron also (and this would also,
be flaming upwards). If the * nature ' be said to consist in
* being produced out oi a particular kind of fuel/ then we would
have no upward flaming in the case of lightning, and such
other fires, which are not produced by any kind of fuel. If
the 'nature' be regarded to be something imperceptible,
existing in certain fires whom we see flaming upward,—then
why object to this peculiar nature being a property of the
Self? Any action that is not caused by gravity, fluidity
or speed, must be regarded as produced from some specific
quality of the Self; as we find in the case of the action of the
hand which is produced by the effort of the Self ; and the said
upward flaming and horizontal blowing we do not find to be
brought about by gravity &c ; as none of these properties exist in
Fire and Air, and also because the actions in question are incom-

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : AtmL

\ 97

patibie with these properties, (of gravity &a) ; hence the two
actions must also be regarded as produced by some specific
quality of the Self; the argument beidg put ia this form : Upward flaming a.nd~horizontal blowing are due to a specific quality
of the Self,—because being actions, they are not produced by
such causes as Gravity and the like,—like the actions of the
hand caused by the man's effort.
In as much as such properties of the Self as Pleasure &c,
are produced by the contact of the Mind with the Self,—this
clearly indicates that Conjunction is a property of the Self; as if
Conjunction did not belong to the Self, then it could not be the
immaterial cause of the properties of that Self; but this also proves
that Disjunction, which is destructive of the said Conjunction,
also belongs to the Self; specially as both the Mind and the
Self being eternal, the destruction of Pleasure &c., could not be due
to the destruction of any of the two substrates of the Conjunction.
Page 89.] Objection : "The Self being eternal, there would be no
Emancipation for one who perceives or recognises this eternal
Self; as being always affected by a longing for pleasure he
would have an attachment to the means of pleasure, and aver«
sion to those of pain ; and these two, attachment and aversion,
would give rise to constant activities and cessations from activity ;
and these io their turn wouhi give rise to Dkarma and Adharma
(and these would lead to a further birth) and so oi*. Whereas if
one did not believe in the existence of the Self, he would be
imbued with the idea—c I myself am not, to whom could any
pain belong ?' ; and thus he would become indifferent to all
pleasures and pains ; and thereby becoming freed from attachment as well as aversion, he would have no activity or cessation
from activity; and this would lead to Emancipation/'
Reply: Not so ; because for one who recognises the eternal
Self also, there would come about due dispassion, produced from a
recognition of the evils inseparable from the objects of enjoyment;
and thta dispassion *would, in due course, bring ^bout Emancipation*

1Q8

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-£äAP. V, SECTION (1C).
SECTION (10)
MIND.

Text (45).—The Mind is so called, because of its belonging
to the class ' mind! III.—ii.—1.
Even tiilxn there is a proximity of the object to the soul
and in* sense-organ, ive find that Cognition,
Pleasure &&, do 'tot appear, and from this toe
infer the necessity of a>i instrumentality other
than the aforesaid proximity. Tkm again, ice Had
that due remembrance appears even when there
4* no functioning of the organs of Hearing ice;
and thai the objects of this means or instrument
are pleasure <&c. which are not cognisable by the
external sense-organs : and from these two facts
we infer the fact of that instrument being
internal. Ill—ii,— 3. VIL—i.—23. V.—ii.—17.
The qualities of the mind are—Number, Dimension,
Sevarateness, Conjunction, Disjunction, Priority^ Posteriority and Faculty.
The Sutra asserts ike non-simultaneity of effort and knowledge; and this proves that there is one mind to
each body. From this follows Separateness*
The Sutra speaking of the 'absence' in the mindf
of that ( Largeness) indicates its atomic dimension. The mention of moving to and moving
away indicates the presence in it of Conjunction
and Disjunction. Its corporeal or material character indicates Priority and Posteriority, as also
Faculty. VIL—ii.—1\.
The Mention of the absence of Tangibility indicates its
being unproductive of substances.
Having action it must be corporeal or material. It
must he regarded as unconscious; as otherwise
ike whole body would be the common ground {of

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : ifind.

199

all experiences or sensations). Beirvg an instrument it must be subservient to the purpose of
something else. III.—.ii.—- 22.
Having qualities it must be regarded as a Substance.
And it must move quickly, in as muck f.t» it
includes within itself all effort and the unseen
forces ( of the soul's) actions.
Commentary.
Page 90.] Having dealt; with the Self or Soul, the most important of the Substances, the author next proceeds to describe
the Mind : Manastvayogät-Jcc,This is to be explained as before.
The generality ' Mind* is inferred from the diversity among,
individual minds. All individuals of similar properties and
actions we find inclusible in a certain single Commonality or
Class,—as in the case of such things as the jar and the like ; and
Minds are individuals having similar properties and actions ;
hence they are inclusible in a single Class.
Until the existence of the Mind has been proved, any
description of its properties would be improper ; hence the author
puts forward proofs for its existence. 'Satyapi <£c. The Soul
is at one and the same time, in contact with ah the senseorgans ; the sense-organs too have contacts with objects in proximity to themselves; and yet we find that while we cognise one of
the various objects in contact with the various sense-organs, we
have ho cognition or pleasure &c, with regard to others ; hence
it follows that for such coguition &c, there is some means or instrumental cause other than the contact of the object, the senseorgan& and the soul;—the proximity of which other cause brings
about the Cognition &c, which do not appear otherwise. T&e
argument may be put forward thus: The contacts of the objects,
the sense-organ and the Soul depend upon some other cause, in the
bringing about of the due effect,—because even when the former
contacts exist, the necessary effect does not appear,—as in the
case of the threads &c. And this instrumentality upon which
they depend is that of the Mind.

200

PKA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CffAP. V. SECTION (10).

Objection: "What is your proof for holding that at the
time that one thing is perceived, there is a contact, with the
sense-organs, of another thing which is not perceived 1 "
Reply: Our proof is the distinctly perceived proximity
(to the object) of the body wherein the organ inheres. That is
to say, at the time that the Colour of an object is perceived, its
smell also is in contact with the organ of smell,—because of its
being in proximity to the body containing that organ,—like
the smell that is perceived.
The author puts forward another argument—Croträdyavyäpäre dec, that is to say, Remembrance is brought about by
means of the sense-organs,—because it is a cognition,—like the
cognition of smell; but it cannot be regarded as brought about
by the organs of hearing and the like,—because we find it
appearing in the deaf and blind also, in whose case there could
be no operation of the organs of heari ug or of vision; consequently the organ by means of which it is brought about
cannot but be the Mind.
The author now proceeds to show that the inference of a
distinct organ is not based upon the above argument alone;
it is to be inferred also from the existence of such perceptible
things as pleasure and the like, which are wholly different in.
character from Colour and other such perceptible things, and
which cannot be perceived by means of the external organs of
sentte. This is what is meant by the senteace Vdhyendriyaih
<&c. The sense of this is as follows : The perception of pleasure &c., must be regarded aa brought about by sense-orgajw,—
because it is direct perception,—like the perception of' colour.
And the seasa-organ by which they are perceived canoe*'but
be the Mind ; as the organs of Vision- &c. are not found to have
any operation in these cases.
Objection: " Being- born of n* senses* apart from themselves, Pleasure &c, could not be regarded as having th* nature

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Mind.

201

of Cognition; and the Cognition of pleasure couid not be apprehended by any other meaus (in the shape of the Mind)."
Reply: If Pleasure and Pain were both of the nature of
cognition pure and simple, then there would be no difference
between them. And if they were distinct from each, other,
then both could not have the nature of pure cognition.
Though the form of 'experience', or ' feeling' is common to both
of them, yet the' forms of Pleasure and Pain are altogether
distinct from each other. Nor can these two be regarded as
produced by a means non-different from cognition ; as cognition is produced from the form of the object perceived ; and it
is from this cognition, as helped by tendencies, that Pleasure
and Pain are produced. If it were not so, then there could
never be any feeling of Indifference. Nor has it been established that cognition is self-cognisable ; specially as we have no
instances of one and the same thfrfg (cognition e. g.) being both
the objective aud the instrument.
Page 91.] The case of the self-luminous lamp might be brought
forward a3 au instance. But the lamp too, is cognised by the man,
is made cognisable by the Eye ; and Cognition only constitutes
its action; and this itself couid not be the Instrument, as
well as the action, the agent as well as the objective.
Objection: "As, for the upholders of the Self (the Vedänti,)
the Self, in its own cognition, is the agent as well as the objeative
at one and the same time,—so too could the various characters
of the Instrument &c. belong to cognitions also."
Reply : Not so ; because the diverse characters are not incompatible in the case of the Self; as the objectivity of the
Self consists in its being the object of the action of cognition ;
and as in this action the Self is independent (of all other things),
it has the character of the agent also; and certainly there ia
no incompatibility between objectivity and indepen4ence.
On the other hand, the character of Instrument and that of
Action are not compatible ; in as much as the instrument is

202

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. V. SECTION (10).

an accomplished thing while an action is something yet tobe
accomplished : specially as there could be no identity between
the effect and the cause. Between the characters of the
Agent and the Instrument also there can be no compatibility,
as the character of the agent consists in not being urged or
used by some thing else, while that of instrument consists in
being employed by others,—and thus one is positive while the
other negative; and as such the two are wholly ineomp;\tible with
each other; and hence they could never coexist in any substrata! m.
Objection: " What we mean by the ' self-cognisabiiity'
of a cognition is, not that it has no means or instruments,—but
that when it is produced, it is self-cognisable by its very
nature."
Reply-: What is it that is illumined io the case of cognitions 1 Is it the object cognised, or the cognition itself ? If
the former, then, the cognisance would be that of the object,
and not that of the cognition ' itself;' and hencs there would
be an uncognisability of the cognition. If the illumination
consisted in the cognition itself, then the cognition itself would
be the obiect as well as the action of illumination ; and thus
there would be an identification of-the action and the instrument.
Nor is there any instance to show that the appearance or production of the cognition constitutes its own operation with regard to itself.
In support of the self-cognisability of cognitions, the opponent has brought forward t lie following argument: " A thing
that depends for its illumination or appearance upon something
else, always appears or becomes illumined on the appearance of
this latter; just as the jar which depends for its appearance
upon the lamp, and as Colour &c.; depend for their mmifestation upon Cognition."
But if the cognition itself constitutes the illumination or
appearance of the object,—then the assertion that Colour &c,
Lav« their appearance d -pendent upon cognition would be

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Mind.

203'

asiddka (not established), and also Amükänta, doubtful, in
view of the Seuse-orgius (on which the manifestation of Colour
&c., is found to depend). If it be held that thw manifestation
oi the object is brought about by cognitions, and not that the
cognitions themselves constitute the manifestation of objects,—
then, there could be no coroborrative instance in support of this
view ; as wh it the lamp d >es is ooly to bring about the cognition
of the object; aud uot a manifestation of it
This also meets the declaration that "one who has DO
direct perception is never known to see an object." As the
seeing of an object does not consist in the directness of the
cognition ; it consists only in the production of an Idea. And
hence even though the cognition may oot be cognised, yet as
soou as it would be produced, the object would become duly
cognised.
Question: " H »w could the production of one thing constitute the cognition of another ? "
Answer: What can we do, when such is the actual nature
of the things themselves? But this would not mean that the
production of one thing would bring about the cognition of all
things. Because the cognition of any thing is restricted by its
auxiliary causes ; because what is produced is the cognisance
which has the character of the cognition of certain definite
objects, and which is cognisable by definite persons.
Others (the Prahhakaras) propose the following explanation :
The object having become manifested by its relationship with
cognition,—the cognition having the nature of light, becomes
self-luminous, like the lamp; and the soul also, being the substratum of the cognition becomes manifested, like the wick of
the lamp light; and thus in all cases there is a threefold cognition
(of the object, of th« cognition and of the soul.)
But this is not correct; because as a matter of fact, we
find that in the cognition, * this is a jar/ there does not enter any

204

PRA(?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. V. SECTION (10)

idea of the cogniser or the cognition. In a case where the
ideas of these do enter,—e. g. in the cognition e I know the
jar'—there too we 6nd that when the cognition has heen produced, we have a direct mental cognition of the object as
qualified by the cognition and the cogniser ; and the ideas of the
cogniser and the cognition do not enter into any visual cognition;
as if they did, theu these two also.would be visible by the Eye.
(Page 92«) Having proved the existence of the Mind, the
author next proceeds to describe its qualities:—Tasya gunäh &c.
That is to say the presence of the eight qualities of Number
&c, constitutes a differentiating peculiarity of the Mind.
The author points out the existence of Number in the
Mind. Prayatna &c, There arising a question as to whether
there is one mind with each body, or there are many minds
in each body, we declare that there is only one mind with each
body, ic because- of the non-simultaneity of efforts and cognitions," as put forward by the author of the Sutra. If there
were many minds, there would be a multiplicity of the contacts
of the self and the mind; arid as such we would find the same
man having many cognitions and putting forth many efforts
atone and the same time. As a matter of fact however we
find these appearing only gradually, one after the other; and
while the man is engaged in one cognition of one thing, he has
no cognition of any other thing; aud when he has ceased to
cognise the former object, then he has a due cognition of the
latter. Similarly efforts tod are found to appear gradually,
one after the other; as when a man is puttiDg forth his effort
in one direction, he does not put forth any in another direction ;
and when the former action has been fiuished, then he does put
forth his efforts towards another action. For these reasons the
Mind must be regarded as one ODIVV. And the mind being one
only, there is only one contact of it at a time; and hence it
follows that at one time, there is a single cognition, and a single
effort.

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Mind.

205

In certain cases we have a notion of more than one cognition appearing at one and the same time ; but that is due to the
fact of the cognitions following each other very quickly (and
hence having the intervals between themselves not perceptible);
just as in the case of the whirling of a fire-brand, we have the idea
of a circle of Are, though in reality it is a single flaming point
revolving so swiftly as to give rise to that notion. And in such
cases too there is no actual symultaneity; specially as from pereeiviag1 ä gradual succession of effects of the instrument in one
case, we infer the fact of other effects also of the same Instrument (Mind) to have the same capability (of appearing in a
gradual succession).
Objection: "In that case, how would you explain this
cognition ' the trees are in flower/ where we find a simultaneous cognition of two objects, the tree and the flowers ? How
too would you explain the simultaneous actions of moving and
rupporting one's own body ?"
Reply:- In. the case of the cognition in question, we have
a single cognition comprising a number of objects; and this
we do not deny; when however the cognitions are distinct (of
the flower and the tree) then we have no cognition in the
form put forward ; as every one of the cognitions is restricted
to a single objecfc
In the same manner, the moving and supporting of one's
body also are accomplished by a single Effort; just as we have
a single cognition with regard to many objects,—so also would
its causes, Deisre aud Effort, apply to more than one action;
and hence there is nothing that cannot be explained in due
accordance with our theory.
From this follows its Separnteness—that is to say, the
quality of Separateness follows from the presence of Number in
the Mind.
TadahMvavacandt Sec. That is to say, the Sutra declares the Äkäc,a and the Self to be all-pervading .and very large,

206

PPA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄHYA-CHAP- VI. (10,)

and then adcb ' on account of the absence of these characters
in the Mind, it Is atomic in its nature. And hence it is proved
that the Mind is atomic in its dimension ; specially as an eternal
substance, which is not all—pervading, could not but be atomic,
(all intervening dimensions belonging to transient things)
The absence of the all-pervading character in the Mind is inferred from the nonsimultaueity of Cognitions; as if the Mind
were all-pervading, then it would be in contact with all the
sense-organs, at one and the same time; and hence there would
be simultaneous cognitions of Colour and Taste «fee,—everything
that might happen to be in contact with the sense organs.
Objection: " How is it that in a case where many objects,
each of which is cognisable by a single sense-organ, are in
contact with, the eye as controlled by the miud,—we have no
simultaneous cognition of all these objects ? for certainly in
this case there is a simultaneous contact of the Self, the Senseorgan and the Object. It might be argued that from the very
fact of thei*3 being no such simultaneity we would assume an
incapability in the contact of the Mind and the Self (30 bring
about more than one cognition, at one and the same time.
But then, the same explanation might be given of the nonsimultaneity of cognitions, even in the case of the Mind being
regarded as all-pervadicg. In view of this, you must put forward some other reasons for denying the all-pervading character
of the Mind."
We put forward the following reasons: The Mind and the
Self l»oth being all-pervading, there would be no contact between
the two (as the contact of two all-pervading things would produce a dimension that would be twice-alll-pervading which
would be an absurdity); and hence there would he no production of such properties of the Self as cognition, pleasure &c;
as these have the contact of the Self and the Mind for their
immaterial cause ; and this would be absent. (Page 93-) If the
contact of the Self and the Object were to be the immaterial
cause of the production of these qualties, then the, cognition

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Mind.

207

would appear in the locality where the Object exists; as all
qualities existing in space are found to be produced in s«ch a way
as not to be separate from their immaterial c*use. If the contact
of the Scjlf and the Sense-organ were th-3 required immaterial
caise, then there would ba no production of the cognition of
sound ; as the Self (which, is all-pervading) could have no contact with the organ of hearing, which is of the nature of AJcä-p i
(which again is all-perva ling\ As a matter of fact we finl that
neither the cognitions appear outside the body, nor is there a
non-production of the cognitions of sound ; and hence we cannot accept either the contact of the Self and the Object, or thtfc
of the S^lf and the Siase-organs, to be the immaterial cause (of
Cognitions, and Pleasure &3.); and so we cannot but accept the
contact of the Self and the mind t> be that.immaterial cause;
and as this would not be possible if the Mind were all-pervadiag, there vvoal 1 ba no appearance of C «g lition etc., if the Mind
were s). As a in-itb3rof fact however, we do fi;id Cognitions and
Pleasure &3. appearing; and this fact precludes all possibility of
the Mind being all«pervading.
Apasarpami &e. That is to say, the Sutra ' Apasarpana &c! distinctly indicates the fact of the Mind moving
away from one (the dead) body and into another body (that the
soul takes), through the agency of the unseen potency of the
soul's actions; and those motions indicate the presence in the
Mind, of the qualities of Conjunction and Disjunction.
Murtatvät <&e. That is to say, the absence of all-pervading
character in the Mind proves its corporeality (or materiality);
and from this it follows that like the jar, the Mind has Priority,
Puseriority and Speed.
Aspargavaävät dfc.—The absence of touch in the Mind is
proved from the fact of its being, like the Self, something different from the Body, and yet being productive of the cognitions
of all things. And from this it also follows that like the Self,
the Mind \s not productive o^ny other homogeneous substances.
Kriyavattvdt Sc.—Though the materiality of the Miod

208

PRAgAStAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. V. SECTION (10.)

has been already proved by showing that it is atomic, yet the
author has added this in order to make it still clearer.
Sddhxranavigraha &c.—If the Mind were the cogniser, then,
the Body would Jbecom-s a common ground of experiences (of
all kinds of sensation; or of the Mind and the Self the two
being two Distinct eognisers.) As a matter of fact however we
donot find this to be the case, in as much as the activity or
inactivity of the body is found to follow the purposes of a single
agent (or the motive of a single sensation.) Hence the Mind
cannot be regarded as conscious. Though the fact of the Mind
being conscious has already been denied, yet the author has
put it forward again, as opportunity presented itself for its
reiteration.
The unconsciousness of the Mind having been proved, the
author adds: Karaiiabhävät &G.—That is to say, it is the meaua
of bringing about the experiences of something other than
itself.
Being endowed with qualities the Mind is a substance, like
the Earth &c. And on account of its containing within itself
efforts and unseen forces (of actions), the Mind must be regarded
as quick in motion. That is to say, being taken up by efforts,
that precede living, and also by attachment and aversion, we
must admit that the mind quickly moves from one place to
another; and seeing that it contains the unseen potencies ( of
actions) we must regard it as quickly moving from one body
to another, at death.
May this Ocean of Substances be duly studied,—the Ocean
which is the receptacle of pearls in thej shape of pure and
various reasonings, and which is full of clear conclusions in the
place of corals.

SPECIAL SUBSTANCES : Mind.

209

CHAPTER VI.
On Qualities*
(Page 94.) Text iß: To the Qualities, Colour and the rest
belong the (common) character of belonging to the
da<8 'Quality,' of inhering in substances, of being
devoid of qualities, and of being devoid of action.
Commentary*
All obeisance to one who is blue like the clouds, lying upon
the bed of Qesha, delighting in the embrace of Lakshmi,—the
destroyer of the Asuras!
Having described the category of Substance, the author
next proceeds to describe the next category of Quality. Rftpadlwxm <&c. The fact of belonging to the generality of 'Quality'
ia the common quality among these ; and it is this that differentiates them from all other categories. The existence of
this generality in Colour &c. is perceived directly by the senses,
as aided by instruction,—just like the generality of * gem.'
That this category is, at first, not distinguished from Action
&c, is due to the extreme likeness between these, consistiog in
the fact of both (Qualities and Actions) inhering in other
8ubstances.
The expression * Rüpidinnm gwiäiiäm' only serves the
pitrpose of nil ntiouinjj the form of these.—"Sarvüskäm" has been
added with a view to include all qualities.
' Dravylcrtatvd—being subordinate to substances. This
only points out a property of Qualities; and it does not poiut
out any thing peculiar to these; as this character is fouud to
belong to actions and substances also.
Similarly the absence of qualities is mentioned by way of
pointing out thi» character of the Qualities; as Qualities are
not capable of producing in themselves other qualities. This
non-productiveness is learnt from the nou-percoption of the fact
of any other colour being produced in one Colour; and also from

210

PRA£ASTAPADA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI.

the fact of the admission of such productions landing us ia a regressus ad i7?finitum. In view of this such assertions as 'one
colour' ( when the quality of Colour is spoken of as having the
quality of Number;, or 'Sound is atomic' and the like must be
regarded as figurative. Because Number &c. could not inhere
in Colour, because it is a quality, like Colour.
The author points out another character of the Qualities:—
Absence of actions. It might be argued that when the substance
moves, ifcs Colour &c. also move along with it (and thus the
action of moving belongs to the quality of Colour). But it is
not so; because as a matter of fact we und that no action is
produced in the sky by the contact of swift wind-currents ;
white an ac'ion is produced in such things as the branches of a
tree; which shows, by negative and positive concomitance, that
action is always concomitant with materiality or corporeality;
and hence as qualities have no material bodies of their own, it
follows that they can have no action.
(Page 95.) As for the ordinary notion of motion with
regard to Qualities, this is due to the action of their substratum;
ju»t as is the case with 'Being,' 'SattV : this * Being' never moves
along with its substratum; as if it did move then ^'Being1 being
common to all things ) when one thing would move, all things
would move with it.
Text (47) Colour, Taste, Smell, Touch, Priority, Posterio- 1
rity, Gravity, Fluidity and Viscidity, and Speed
are qualities that belong to corporeal objects.
Comment aiy.
The author now proceeds to »how the similarities and J
difference* among the Qualities themselves. RtLpa ifcc. These 1
qualities belong only to corporeal objects, and never to incor-f
poreai (or immaterial) objects.
J
For instance, Colour, Taste, Touch, Priority, Posteriority!
and Speed belong to Earth, Waier and Light; all these except, f

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.
,

C

o

l

o

u

M

i

n

d

W

a

t

e

r

b

;

r

T

e

e

l

o

t

e

T

a

s

a

n

d

x

t

n

£

)

f

i

n

i

3

E

t

a

L

(

g

g

m

r

t

m

n

t

e

V

t

e

l

i

t

y

c

i

d

c

t

a

;

s

e

r

i

r

v

i

l

i

r

i

a

V

,

a

r

;

I

o

A

G

t

.

f

o

d

h

t

u

i

,

e

a

l

t

o

t

y

P

l

h

i

A

o

u

l

n

l

d

T

t

h

b

e

l

x

t

e

e

s

o

e

n

(

q

g

4

u

s

9

)

a

a

t

N

n

l

i

o

t

A

i

k

u

m

D

i

s

j

u

i

t

i

e

s

p

a

d

b

e

s

l

g

c

e

r

e

a

g

t

h

i

n

g

s

h

e

e

x

s

e

q

u

a

l

D

c

b

'

i

a

w

n

h

n

a

y

e

r

d

t

n

(

r

e

o

n

e

.

e

o

n

n

5

h

T

s

0

)

.

S

e

o

b

d

t

w

w

x

o

(

d

i

C

j

r

e

u

c

i

m

t

i

o

e

l

o

o

n

j

u

n

t

e

n

e

s

a

e

n

O

u

n

c

t

i

u

a

r

e

a

n

d

W

a

t

e

r

;

a

n

d

t

,

F

m

p

e

P

a

c

n

t

n

s

b

e

o

n

u

t

S

i

o

l

m

l

a

o

n

o

l

a

i

t

y

r

u

t

,

n

m

g

c

t

s

e

S

e

p

a

t

h

e

o

o

r

o

o

r

r

'

d

m

)

j

t

e

e

e

s

n

c

o

n

n

e

,

C

t

o

o

l

o

t

w

o

u

;

a

n

t

o

r

e

u

n

c

t

t

h

i

n

g

s

t

h

a

n

s

e

s

"

h

T

—

k

s

i

n

a

l

a

o

u

n

r

a

e

D

n

d

r

T

o

F

l

u

u

r

;

O

,

a

n

d

e

o

s

d

i

r

S

e

o

u

c

i

d

t

i

t

d

b

e

y

l

o

n

r

t

h

.

i

o

n

t

E

A

n

b

o

,

u

.

h

o

a

v

e

r

s

e

l

o

n

g

S

e

l

—

—

g

E

t

a

"

o

r

t

h

a

n

d

,

t

o

y

n

.

d

b

e

l

o

e

n

e

a

s

n

g

t

o

t

h

e

o

n

j

f

;

S

g

e

n

o

e

t

p

a

o

r

d

t

a

m

a

t

e

t

h

e

n

d

a

o

r

y

r

i

t

t

h

s

s

,

C

u

n

c

t

i

o

n

.

.

a

l

w

e

l

o

n

,

l

a

s

t

o

i

m

m

a

t

e

r

i

a

l

e

b

j

o

n

n

,

D

d

i

s

r

e

j

u

s

t

n

c

i

t

n

i

h

e

i

v

i

a

r

r

D

e

i

u

n

m

a

l

i

o

r

e

t

y

,

t

h

D

a

n

u

a

l

o

n

e

e

i

i

x

e

i

c

s

t

t

s

l

l

m

h

i

t

e

n

u

d

o

f

e

g

m

n

e

,

a

o

n

a

;

n

n

e

.

t

a

d

'

r

y

a

n

h

e

n

S

i

m

a

s

.

i

c

i

n

d

e

l

a

r

l

d

u

e

a

t

y

t

o

l

h

D

e

o

i

s

y

w

j

s

i

t

u

p

h

n

o

c

k

D

u

t

i

e

a

o

n

i

t

y

t

s

n

l

o

f

s

t

h

n

e

i

n

T

h

s

e

r

e

g

e

'

,

i

u

n

o

h

a

n

e

r

i

n

g

o

n

e

'

g

l

e

t

d

t

h

e

S

i

i

n

e

p

m

s

a

p

a

o

p

r

r

l

a

t

e

i

e

d

a

n

e

a

n

n

e

n

e

s

s

o

b

j

e

c

i

n

o

c

o

m

k

o

f

t

h

a

C

o

n

n

-

.

i

i

n

e

a

s

t

s

i

m

o

.

c

j

t

h

r

o

i

a

o

j

t

n

t

t

:

o

o

b

a

o

d

l

w

r

f

n

C

n

C

j

,

h

o

t

l

t

r

s

a

n

o

a

t

i

m

d

n

v

t

n

e

e

i

l

n

o

d

i

i

a

t

x

a

A

,

n

g

u

T

m

e

i

"

h

i

s

D

t

s

e

t

W

C

.

e

C

A

l

r

e

.

T

a

v

o

a

m

c

C

T

s

o

x

a

t

c

a

.

,

n

E

i

n

s

e

V

t

l

l

,

C

S

211

•

h

o

n

.

c

e

r

m

e

m

o

n

e

o

m

m

e

o

o

n

i

n

n

t

l

.

»

s

a

j

o

i

r

c

t

n

y

;

m

b

n

t

c

s

.

.

a

n

d

i

t

c

o

t

l

i

-

212

PRACASTAPÄDA BHÄSHY/A—CHAP. VI.

Text (5-2):— Colour, Taste, Smell, Touch, Viscidity, Natural
Fluidity, IntdU t, Pleasure, Pain, Desire, Aversion
Effort, Virtue, Vice, Faculty and Sound are the
* Vai^shiloa ' {'specific1) qualities.
Commentary.
(Page 96«) These are called ' Väiceahika (specific), because
they serve the purpose of specifying or differentiating the
substances to which they belong from other substances. This
purpose is not served by Number or other qualities ; because
they have got no specifications of themselves, all the specification that they hare being due to the peculiarities of their
substratum.
Text (53):—JVumoer, Dimension, Separatencss, Conjunction,
Disjunction, Priority, Posterority, Gravity, Caused
Fluidity and Speed are the 'Sam tnya,' ('Generic')
Qualities.
Commentary.
These are qualities that serve the purpose of similarising
( reducing to a common basis ) their substratum ; and they do
not serve to specify or differentiate them. It might be argued
that the Atomic Dimension serves to differentiate the Atom
from other things. But this Dimension too is common to the
*atoms of the several substances. As Natural Fluidity is the
specific quality of Water, we have Fluidity here qualified as

4):—Sound, Touch, Colour, Taste and Smell are each
perceptible by each one of the external sense-organs.
Commentary.
The organs of vision &c., are called 'external,' as they
bring about the perception of external objects. Each of these
perceives Colour &c.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES,

213

Text {55)-.—Number,Dimenaiony Separateness, Conjunction
Disjunction?Priwity, Posteriority, Fluidity, Viscidity and Speed are each perceptible by two senseorgans.
Commentary.
These are perceptible by the organs of vision and touch.
Just as by the Eye we perceive a thing to be viscid, so also we
perceive by the organ of touch: and hence like Number &c.
Viscidity also is perceived by the two sense-organs.
Text (56):—Intellect, Pleasure, Pain, Desire, Aversion, Effort
are perceptible by the Internal Organ.
CommentaryIntellect &c, are cognised by the Mind alone. Some
people hold that Intellect is an object of Inferential Knowledge
and is not perceived by the Mind. But this is not right ; as
there would be no distinguishing mark—middle term—by
which Intellect could be inferred. * Allo bjects' could not serve
as that term ; as in that case the premiss would be too wide.
Nor could ' cognised object * serve as the term required. Because cognisedness consists in relationship with cognition ; and
this fact of being an objective of cogüition ia never fouod to
be perceived until the cognition is known; as the perception of
the relationship depends upon a knowledge of the members*
bearing that relationship. Hence how could an objeot qualifying or determining that (cognition ) serve as the * mark ' or
' middle term ' ? Specially as, like the cognition, the qualification of the cognition also, aids in bringing about the inferential cognition, only when it is itself known.
Objection: " After the cognition has been produced, there
is produced in the object a peculiar condition known as * cognisedness/ just as the aotfon of cooking produces, in the Rice,
the condition of cookednass. And this cogniscdnes* being a
property of the object is knowu along with the object itself/'

214

PRAGASTAPADA BAÄSHYA—CHAP. VI.

Page 97-] R^ply : There is not much in this theory ; as such is
not found to be the case in ordinary experience. That is to say,
iri the case of the Rice, we distinctly perceive its cookedness in its
being changed from Tandula (uncooked rice) to od ma (cooked
rice) ; but in the case of the object in question we do not perceive any such cognised ness. As for the character of its having
a directly perceptible form, and also its capability of being acquired or rejected,—these also consist in its relationship to
cognition; and they are not distioct properties of some other
properties (of that object). Then again, just as when the object
is cognised, there is produced cogaisedness in it, so in the same
manner when this cogmsedness is known, there would be a
cognisedness produced in that cognisedaess also; and so on we
-would go on ad infiuitum
If cognised ness be regarded as
self-luminous (in or,der to avoid this regressus ad inünitam)—
then, we ask, why should you object to this self-luminosity
(self cognisabilityj in the cognition itself?
" Though as a matter of fact, the object has an existence extending over all three periods of time, past, present and future,
yet when it is cognised it is cognised as belonging to the 'present
And the condition of the object determined by the present time
is what constitutes its coguisedneai; and this being an effect
of the cognition, serves as the * mark' for an Infuence of
Cognition."
But th )re is not much to recommend in thi.s theory either, •>
Because what the ' condition of the object determined by the
present time ' means is its condition qualified by that time ; and f
this belongs to the object by its very nature; and by cognition, |
this condition is not produced, but only known.
|
One who holds that cognition is inftrahle from the knowledge J
that we have of objects, should be met by the following arguments : |
Does the ' knowledge of objects' inhere in the self, or in tbej
object ? It could not be regarded as inhering in the object, as,;
it has been shewn that consciousness cannot belong to objects.

QUALITIES i SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

215

If it be regarded as inhering in the self, then what cognition is
there besides this, which would be inferred from that knowledge?
It might be argued that what would be inferred from this
' knowledge ' would be its cause, in the shape of the action of
the cogniser. But we ask—Is this 'cause' eternal, or transitory ?
If it be transitory, then we should have to find a cause for that
also. It might be put forward thAfc the cause of this would be
the contact of tJte Mind and the cogniser, which aids in the
contact of the Sense-organ with the object. But in that
case we might have all this cantact an the cause of the
'knowledge;' and what would be the use of having an intermediate c-iuse in the form of the f c«>gniserfs action' ? If on the
other hand, it be held, that, " the said action f is eternal, and
that the appearance of the knowledge of objects only at certain
times (and not always) is due to the fact of the accessory causes,
(in the shape of sense-contact &c), being operative only at certain
times,"—then, the production of ' knowledge ' being found to
be duly brought about by means of these incidental agencies
(of sense-contact &c), the postulating of that ' action' would be
absolutely useless; specially as the cognition of the object, as
also ail subsequent usage based thereupon, could be accomplished by means of the said ' knowledge ' itself.
Objection: " How could the cognition produced by the object,
the sense-organ &c, be regarded as inhering in the Self alone,
if the Self did not consist it* natural consciousness coeval with
itself? Specially as if the Self were unconscious, then its causal
efficiency with regard to the cognition not iu any way differing;
from that of sense-contact &c., the cognition might be regarded
as inhering ia tlie Sense-organ &e."
Beply : It is not so; because the required restriction would
be the result of the peculiar nature of the things concerued.
As for instance, even though the threads are not the cloth, yet on
account of the rescriction of the class * Thread,1 the cloth inheres \L them, and not in the shuttle (and other implements

216

PRACASTAPADA BHÄSHYA-CHAr. VI.

of weaving) ; and so, in the same manner, though the Self consists in pure consciousness, yet on account of the restrictions
accompanying the class l Self/ it would be in this that the cognition would inhere.
This also meets the theory held hy some that the cognition of
itself constitutes the self's * conciousaess.' As if it were so, then
there would be a correct cognition of the Self even daring the
ordinary state of mau. It might be argued that during the
ordinary state the consciousness is hidden by Ignorance;
but we ask—Is there Ignorance in Brahma also ? How too,
could that which is self-luminous and eternal could be spoken
of as hidden ? Then ag-tin when it would be hidden, then
there would be no cognition of any thing else ; because of the
scriptural text—-' all this shines by the light of that (consciousness).* If on the other hand, any other cognition does
appear, then there would be universal liberation; as the appearance of Vidyä, Knowledge, would destroy all Avidyä, Ignorance. If it be held that Ignorance does not disappear, then, the
light of knowledge not being the cause of the destruction of
Ignorance, no iiberatiou would be possible.* Nor could we
even think of the 'partial manifestation of that which is without
parts.
Text (-57): Gravity, Virtue, Vice and Faculty are beyond
the sense-organs.
Commentary.
These qualities are not perceived by any of the senseorgans.
Text {58) .—The Apdkaja Colour, Taste, Smell, Touch, Dimension, Singleness, Single Separateness, Gravity, Fluidity, Viscidity and Speed are preceded(or originated)
by {like) qualities in the cause (of the thing to which
they bdong.)

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES ANp DISSIMILARITIES.

217

Commentary.
That is to say, these qualities are preceded by (originates
from) like qualities in the material cause of the substances to
which they belong; for instance, the colour of the cloth
originates from the colour of the threads coostituting it; as it
is this latter that it is found invariably bo follow. If it were
oot so, then any and every quality might appear in the cloth,
there being no restrictive cause.
This sets aside the view that in all things, there is a single
colour of whiteness which is-always recognised as such. Because if such were the case then, there would be no varying
shades of colours. Hence the said recognition must be regarded
as pertaining to the generality of * whiteness.'
The colour &c, of the earth-atom is producer! by a process
of cooking (or baking) by contact with fire ; and in the atom
they are not due to. any similar qualities in a material cause of
the atom. Hence it is with a view to preclude such quality &c,
that the author has added the qualific -ition ' apJikaja.' It is
only when the 'production of the qualities has been established,
that there can be any consideration as to whether they are due
to similar qualities in the cause, or they are not so due ; hence as
there is no production of the colour &c, of water &c, (which
•are natural to thesej, the case of these couLl not be brought torward against the statement of the text.
;

The fact of the qualities being preceded by like qualities in
the cause has been asserte>4 simply by way of pointing out this
character, and not for defining strictly the qualities thus proceded ; because caused fluidity and speed are such as could
appear even without the precedence of like qualities in the
cause. I» the case of these two qualities, the character of
being preceded by like qualities in bhe cause must be regarded
as referring to such of these qualities as inhere in substances
produced out of things having speed aud in those having water
for their constituent,
15

218

PPA^ASTAPÄpA BHÄSHYA.—CHAP. VI.

Text (59) :—Intellect. Pleasure, Pain, Desire, Aversion, Effort,
Virtue, Vice, Faculty and Sound are not preceded by
(donot originate from) like qualities in the cause.
Commentary.
These qualities are not due to like qualities subsisting in
the material causes of the substances in which they inhere.
Text (60):—Intellect, Pleasure, Pain, Desire, Aversion, Effort,
Virtue, Vice, Faculty, Sound, Aggregate-dimension,
Secondary Conjunction, Caused Fluidity, Priority
and Posteriority are not produced by cooking ; they
are produced by Conjunction.
Commentary.
Page 99J From Intellect, down to Faculty, all are ^produced by the Conjunction of the Self with the Mind. Sound is,
produced by the Conjunction of Äkäca with the sounding drum.
Aggregate-dimension is produced by the conjunction of many
things, one after the other. Secondary Conjunction is produced by conjunction. Caused Fluidity is produced by the
conjunction of fire. Priority and Posteriority are produced by
the conjunction of the object with Time and Space. And the
Colour, Taste, Odour and Touch of the Earth-atom is produced
by the contact of Fire.
Text (61):—Conjunction, Disjunction and Speed are produced
by actions.
Commentary.
That is to say, the primary or initiatory Conjunction and \
Disjunction are produced by Action, (the subsequent Conjunc-f
tions being the effects of previous Conjunction.)
I
'h
Text (62) .—Sound and Secondary Disjunction are produced^
by Disjunction,
j

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

219

Commentary.
The first sound is produced by disjunction also; while the
secondary disjunction is produced by disjunction alone.
Text {63):—Priority, Posteriority, Duality, Dual Separateness,
dec. are dependent upon the Intellect
Commentary.
That is to say, the Intellect is the instrumental cause in
the production of these qualities.
" Etc." includes the Separateness of Three and the rest.
Text {64)-.—Colour,Taste, Smell, Non-hot Touch, Sound, Dimension, Singleness, Single Separateness and Viscidity are productive of their Wees.
Commentary.
The Colour of the cause produces the colour of the effect,
its Taste produces the taste, its Smell the smell, Touch
the touch, Viscidity the viscidity, and Large dimension the
same dimension, in the effect. As for Sound, it produces another
sound in its own substratum.
By ' cause f is meant cause in general, and not merely the
non-material cause; otherwise it would not be proper to preclude the hot touch of the instrumental cause of unlike qualities
brought about by cooking.
Objection :—" If such be the case, then how could Colour
be the cause of Cognition (which is not like, or cognate w ith,
it).Reply:—The restriction—in the shape the productiveness
of their likes—has been made, barring the productiveness of
cognition.
Text (65):—Pleasure, Pain, Desire, Aversion and Bfort are
productive of their unlikes.

220

PIUgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. Tl.

Commentary.
That is to say, Pleasure is productive of Desire, Pain of
Aversion, Desire and Aversion of Effort, and Effort of Action.
Objection: "The Pleasure of the son must be regarded as
producing its like, in the shape of the Pleasure of the father ;
otherwise, there could be no explaining of the delight that
the father feels at his son's happiness."
Beply: There is not much in this; the process in such
cases is that the father notices certain marks in the face and
general countenance of his son, from which he infers the existence of Pleasure in him; and then there is a Pleasure produced
in himself. And in the production of this Pleasure, the cause
is not the son's pleasure, which does not last ail this time; in
fact its origin must be the purely inferential knowledge of
the son's Pleasure.
Page 100 ] Conjunction, Disjunction, Number, Gravity,Fluidity, Hot touch, Knowledge, Virtue\ Vice and Faculty are productive of likes as well as unlihes.
Commentary.
|
From Conjunction there proceeds a like quality in the |
shape of the secondary conjunction,—and also an unlike quality |
in the shape of the Dimension of the double layer of cotton I
(which is produced by the conjunction of the two layers).
;
s
From Disjunction is produced the like quality of another J
Disjunction, and the unlike quality of Sound.
j
From the Number one in the cause is produced the like j
quality of the number one in the effect; and from the Numbers I
two and Many are produced the unlike qualities of the Atomic I
and Large Dimensions.
j
From Gravity is produced a like quality in the shape of j
further Gravity, and also an unlike one in the shape of Falling. J
From Fluidity follows another fluidity, as also the action of 1
/lowing.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

221

From Hot Touch is produced another Hot Touch, and also
the Colour &c, of the Earth-atom.
From Knowledge is produced knowledge, as well as Faculty.
From Virtue follows another Virtue, as also Pleasure.
From Vice follows Vice, and also Pain.
From Faculty follows Faculty, and also Remembrance.

Text {68):—Colour, Taste, Smell, Touch, Dimension, Viscidity,
Effort, are productive {of qualities) in other things.
Commentary.
The Colour &c, inhering in the constituent parts produce,
as far as possible, Colour &c, in the whole made up of those
parts. The effort inhering in the Self is the cause of the
I; action of his hands.
Text (69);—Conjunction, Disjunction, Number, Single Location, Gravity, Fluidity, Speed, Virtue and Vice are
productive (of qualities) in both.
Commentary.
I
That is to say, these produce qualities in their own subs[ftrates, as well as in other things. For instance, the conjunctions
I existing in the threads produce in themselves the cloth ; while
|the conjunction of the object and the sense-organs produces
I knowledge in the Self. The Disjunction of the bamboo fibres
| produces sound elsewhere, in the Akd^a] and the Disjunction of
^ the bamboo fibre and the Alcana produces sound in the Äkäca
I which is also a substrate of the Disjunction. The Number one
I inhering in the constituent parts produces the same Number in
the whole, and also, the Numbers two and the rest in themselves.
|The single separateness in the parts produces similar separateJness in the whole, and the double and treble separateness in
'their own substrates. The Gravity, Fluidity and Speed of the

222

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI.

cause produce like qualities in the Effect, and also action in
fcheir own substrates. Virtue and Vice produce Pleasure and
Pain in the Self, and also the action of burning &c., in the Fire
(kindled at sacrifices).
Page 101 ] Gravity, Fluidity, Speed, Effort, Virtue, Vice and
Conjunction of a 'particular kind, are the causes of
actions.
Commentary.
From Gravity follows the action of falling; from Fluidity,
flowing; Tom speed, the consecutive actions of the shot arrow;
from Effort, the actions of the body, limbs &c; from Virtue and
Vice the actions of fire &c; and from the particular kind of
Conjunction, in the form of moving and striking, is also produced action, as will be explained later on.
Text (71):—Colour, Taste, Smell, non-hot Touch, Number,
Dimension, Single Separateness, Viscidity, and
Sound are nvti-material causes.
Commentary.
The "Immaterial cause" is that which is in touch with the
material cause, and has a well-known efficiency (towards the
effect). This ' touch' consists in inhering in the material
cause, and also in inhering in the same substratum in which
the material cause inheres. For instance, the material cause of
Pleasure &c, is the Self; and therein inheres the contact of the
Self and the Mind; and this contact is the Immaterial Cause
of Pleasure &c.
Objection: •' If such be the case, then Virtue and Vice also
would be Immaterial causes/
Reply: Not so; because they are never duly recognised as
having any causal efficiency towards the production of the
specific qualities of the whole Self; that is to say, Virtue does
not produce Vice aad Pain ; nor does Vice produce Virtue and
Pleasure.

QUALITIES .• SIMILARITIES AtfD DISSIMILARITIES»

223

I» the same way it may be shown that the definition does
not apply to Cognition &c. As for the contact of the Cogniser
and the Mind, it is recognised as having a universal causal
efficiency; and it is this peculiarity in this contact that makes
ifc the " Immaterial cause."
Then again, we find the Colour of the Threads inhering in
the Threads, wherein also inheres the cloth which is the material
cause of the Colour of the, Cloth ; and tlieuce the Colour of the
Threads is recognised as the Immaterial cause of the Colour of
the Cloth. And of this latter Taste &c, could not be the immaterial cause ; as it is the Colour of the Threads alone which is
found, by positive and negative induction, to have the
necessary causal efficiency.
Similarly we may explain the case of Taste &c. Hot Touch
is also the Efficient or Instrumental cause of the qualities produced by cooking; hence the author mentions-only the non-hot
'Touch.'
Colour, Taste, Smell, Non-hot Touch, Dimension and Viscidity are such Immaterial causes as inhere in the same substratum as the material cause; as it is only when these subsist
io the material cause that they produce, in the effect, their
likes. Sound is an Immaterial cause that inheres in the material
cause; as it is when subsisting in Äkä^a that it produces
another Sound, and that too in the Äkäga itself. Number and
Separateness can be the Immaterial cause of both kinds: when
subsisting in the (material) cause, they produce, respectively, in
the cause, singleness and separateness; while in their own
substratum, they produce duality and dual separateness,
repectively.
[Page 102] Text (72) -.—Intellect, Pleasure, Pain, Desire,
Aversion, Effort, Virtue, Vice and Faculty have the
character of efficient (or instrumental) causes.

224;

PKA<?ASTAFÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI.

Commentary.
These can be efficient causes alone, ( and not Material or
Immaterial causes.)
Text {73):—Conjunction, Disjunction, Hot Touch, Gravity,
Fluidity and Speed have the character of both kinds
of causes.
Commentary.
These qualities act as immaterial as well as instrumental
(or efficient) causes. For instance, the conjunction of the drum
aud the stick is the instrumental cause of the production of
sound; while the Conjunction of the Drum and Äkäca -is the
immaterial cause of that production. Similarly the Disjunction
of the bamboo fibres is the instrumental, and that of the fibres
from Älcäca, the immaterial cause of the production of sound/
Hot Touch is the* immaterial cause of hot touch, and the instrumental cause of the qualities produced by baking. Gravity is
the immaterial cause of the falling of the substance in which it
inheres, and the pressure due to gravity is the instrumental
cause iu the production of action. Similarly with Fluidity and
Speed.
Text (74) :—Priority, Posteriority, Duality, Dual Separate- f
ness and the rest have no causal efficiency.
|
Commentaryj
These qualities are neither immaterial nor instrumental J
causes. "And the rest " has been added with a view to include
Treble Separateness and so forth, as also the Atomic and
Infinite Dimensions.
Text (yj) :—Conjunction, Disjunction, Sound and the
Specific Qualities of the Self have a partial ;
existence.
Commentary.
The6C qualities donot extend over the whoie of their sub-

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

225

strates ; that is to say, they exist (in parts) and also do not exist
(in other parts) of their substrates.
Objection:—" This is not proper ; because one and the
same tiling can not both exist, and not exist, at oue and the
same time, in a single substrate."
Reply:—There is nothing incongruous in this; as this is
actually found to be the case, by the ordinary means of knowledge. For instance, when a mau gets upon a tree, hi& cpujunction with the tree is present at the top of the tree, but is absent
afc its base; and though all men perceive the tree at its base,
they donot perceive there the said conjunction. It is not that
we have preseuce and abseuce of the Conjunction at the top
and base respectively (and heuce not in the same thing). Because what we cognise is that the man is present and absent
in the tree itself, as considered with reference to its two parts.
If the conjunction belonged to the particular part, and not to
the whole to wluqli that part belongs, theu, in as much as
that part also would be a whole with reference to its own
parts, the conjunction would dually come to belong to the atom.
But the conjunction existing in the atom could nut be perceived
by the senses, and hence there would come to be a total oonperception of conjunction ; and just as a single object, though
haviug various colours, dues not cease to be a stogie object, so,
in the same manner, it would not cease to be one, by reasou of
the presence and absence of conjunction in different parts of
itself; and in connection with those of these (preseuce and
absence), the object is distinctly perceived to be one only. Though
conjunction belongs to both the tilings (eonjoined), and as such is
perceived o& the perception of both of those, yet, in as much as
it is not found, like Colour &c, to pervade over all the parts of
the object perceived, it is regarded as non-pervading (partial).
[Page 103] Similarly Sound also does not pervade over the
whole of Aka$a ; as it is quite possible for it to exist as well as
not exist iu the various of parts of AMä^a.
Intellect etc. are non-pervading, because they are perceived
inside and not outside.

226

PRA(?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI.

Objection :—" How thea do Virtue and Vice (i. e.,
produce action in the fire ? For these do not exist in any part
of the fire.'*
Reply:—Not so; though they do not exist there, yet they
operate as instrumental causes, merely by the proximity (to
the fire) of their substratum. Just as, for instance, when one
end of the cloth is touched by a chändäla, it produces an
uncieanliness in the man of the three higher castes, who may
be touching that cloth at the other end.
Text (76): The other qualities extend over the whole of
their substrates.
Commentary.
Qualities other than those enumerated above extend over
the whole of their substrates, and do not, like Conjunction etc.,
exist in certain parts of them
Text (77); Colour not produced by baking, Taste, Smell,
Touch, Dimension, Singleness, Single Separateness, Natural Fluidity, Gravity and
Viscidity exist as long as the substance (to
which they belong).
Commentary.
So long as the substance lasts, its Colour &c. also last.
As for the Colour &c. produced by biking, they are destroyed
while other substrates still exist; hence the author adds 'apiJcajd
(not produced l»y baking).
Text (78): The rest are not coeval with the substance.

|

Commentary.
The qualities other than those just enumerated, do not
last as long aa their substrates exist; i. e. they nre destroyed 3
wliil«? their substrates still exist.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES

227

Text (79): All the qualities, Colour and the rest, being
each related to a lower generality, come to
be nam^d as 'Colour' &c.
Commentary.
The author now proceeds to point out the dissimilarity
of each of the. Qualities from another. Each of these Qualities
is related to the Generality of 'Colour' &c, and as such they
ct)me to be known as 'Colour', 'Taste' &c. That is to say, the
names 'Colour/ &c. constitute the point of dissimilarity of each
of the qualities from the rest
Some people hold that there is no such generality as
'Colour'. But this is not right. Because as a matter of fact,
we find that with regard to every one of the colours of blue, red
and the like, there is a common notion of 'Colour/—every one
of them being known as 'Colour/
Objection: "This common notion may be due to the
common character of being perceptible by the eye."
Reply: Not so ; that these are 'Colours' is not perceived
by the eye. If the notion of colour were due to the fact of
their being perceptible by the Eye, then that notion would
appear after their perception (while as a matter of fact, we find
them known as Colours at all times.)
Objection: "What is meant by * perceptibility by the
Eye* is the capability of being comprehended by the Eye; and
this capability continues to exist in Blue at all three points
of time (past, present and future)/'
Reply: That may be ; but as for that capability too,
if it were different with each individual Colour, then we could
not have any such comprehensive notion of them all as 'Colour';
as there would be no ground for any such comprehensive notion.
And if that capability be held to be common to all colours,
then there is only s difference in names (between our theory
and yours).

228

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI.

The same argument holds as regards Taste and the other
qualities.
Page 104 ] Of these, Colour is perceptible by the Eye.
VIII-ii-6, IV-i-8.
It exists in Earth, Water and Light (Fire); it brings about
the seeing of objects, and serves as an aid to
the Eye, II-i-13, IV-i-6.
It is of various hinds, * White1 and the rest.
It is eternal in the atoms of Water &c. VII-i-3, 4.
In the atoms of Earth, it is opposed to contact with fire.
In all material products, it is preceded
(brought about) by a like quality in the Cause]
and it is destroyed by the destruction of its
substratum.
Commentary.
I
The author proceeds to describe Colour first, as it is |
Colour that is the direct cause of the manifestation or appear- f
ance of all things.
Among Qualities, Colour is perceived by the Eye alone, -j
and not by any other sense-organ.
Objection : -'In as much as the generality 'rüpatva also
is perceived by the Eye, how could perceptibility by the Eye
be regarded as the distinguishing quality of Colour ?"
Reply : Ail that we mean is that the said perceptibility
serves to distinguish Colour from- all other qualities: as the
word 'tatra,' ' of these \ distinctly refers only to the Categories under consideracion [i.e. Qualities, and 'rupatva* is
not a quality). As for generalities (like 'rüpatva'), Colour is
distinguished from these (which have no generalities) by the
fact of its having a generality.
Colour subsists only in Earth, Water and Light (Fire).
It makes perceptible the substance wherein it subsists, also
the Qualities, Action and Generalities pertaining to that substance. The colour of an object aids the £ye in the perception!
of that object.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

229

Colour is eternal in the atoms of Water and Light. In
the atoms of earth it is destroyed by the contact of fire, as we
shall show later on.
The colour of all products is preceded (brought about)
by the colour of the object which is the material cause of those
products. The destruction of the Colour of the product is due
to the destruction of the object in which it subsists.
Objection: "We cannot admit that the destruction of Colour
follows upon the destruction of the object wherein it subsists; because as a matter of fact we find that the destruction
of the substance and its Colour is simultaneous."
Reply: It is not so ; because there is (at that time) no
cause for the destruction of Colour. In the case of the substance, the jar for instance, we find that when it is struck by
a club, there is produced a certain action among its constituent particles, and this action brings about the destruction of
the conjunction or cohesion of the particles forming the object;
and then follows the destruction of the object formed by that
cohesion, from the destruction of its cause (in the shape of
this cohesion). For the destruction of the Colour of that
substance, however, we find no cause at that time. If the
destruction of the Colour were to follow upon that of the
cohesion of the particles of the object, which cohesion is not
the cause of that Colour,—then, there would be a destruction
of the Colours of the earthenware fragments also. Hence we
consider it right to hold that it is the substance that is destroyed first, and after this destruction there follows the destruction of the Colour subsisting in that substance; and the
interval between the two destructions is so small that people
are led to regard them as simultaneous.
Some people regard the Colour and the Substance wherein it subsists to be identical, and hence they hold the cause
of the destruction of Colour to be the same as that of the
destruction of the Substance. To these persons the followiog

230

PKACASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA--CHAP. VI.

questions should be put:—Does the colour of the atom produce
another Colour or not ? When producing it, does it produce
it within the Colour itself, or in its substratum, the atom? If
it does not produce it, or if it produces it within itself, or in
the atom only,—then no Colour could be produced in the
Diad: and hence the whole world proceeding from that Diad,
would also be colourless.
Page 105] If on the other hand, the atom produces the Colour in the Diad, then in as much as nothing
that has not itself been brought into existence could be the
substratum of that produced Colour, this latter could be produced only after its substratum, the Diad, had been produced;
as no effect could ever be produced without a substratum«
Under the circumstances, how could these be any identity
between the two,—the two appearing one after the other ? |
Then again, you hold that it is only while the jar is existing |
that its Colour is destroyed by the contact of fire, and that it
is while the jar exists that the Colour is produced in it (by
the contact of fire). And there can be no identity between
two things, when the production of the one does not mean the
production of the other, and the cessation of the one does not 1
mean the cessation of another. Nor is it necessary that if
the two were different there would be a chance of their being ^
perceived apart from each other (which is not found to be the
case). Because Colour is always found to subsist in a substance. And as for this, it is the nature of things, and hence"
there is no good urging any serious abjections against it.
Tkxt (81): Taste is perceived by the Tongue. It
in Earth and Water. It is the cauae of th$l
8U8taining of life, of developing the body,\
producing strength and bringing about healthM
It aide the Tongue. It is of several kindtS
Sweet, Acid, Saltish, Bitter, Hot and P«n-f
gent. The eternality and noneternality of

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

231

this also is like those of Colour. IV-i;-VIIIii-6- II-i-1, 2; VII-i-1, 2 to 7.
Commentary.
In the course of the treatment of each of the specific
qualities of perceptible substances, as are perceived by each
of the external organs of perception, it was necessary for our
author to describe Taste and Odour, after he had dealt with
Colour, which has the peculiarity of subsisting in more than
one substance; and he now proceeds to describe Taste.
Among qualities it is Taste alone that is perceived by the
Tongue; and it is by the Tongue alone that it is perceived.
It subsists only in Earth and Water.
'Jivana' is the substance of life. By 'pushfb i«? meant the
increase in constituent materials. 'Bala? is a peculiar Energy.
'Ärogya' is freedom from diseases. ^Of all these, Taste is the
cause, as may be learnt from works oh medicine.
The Taste subsisting in the Tongue aids in the perception of the Taste outside itself. It is of six kinds, sweet and
the rest,
Jusc as the Colour of the Earth-atoms is non-eteroal being
produced and destroyed by the contact of fire; while that of
the Water-atom is eternal; and the Cclour of the product is
preceded by a like Colour in the material cau.se; and is destroyed by the destruction of its substratum,—so exactly is
the case with Taste also.
Text (82) Odour is'perceptible by the nose. It subsists in
Earth. It aids the nose. It is good and dad.
The production &c. of this also are as explained before. IV-i-9, VIII-ii-5, II-i-1,
II-i-1, II-ii-2, VII-i-2 to 7.
Commentary.
[Page 106.] Odour alone is preceived by nose, and it is

232

PKAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI.

perceived by the nose alone. This restriction is based upon the
nature of odour. That is to say the nature of odour is such
that id is this alone that is perceived by the nose; there being
no declaration, either affirmative or negative, with legard to
such as are either seen or inferred.
The oJour subsisting in the nose aids it. It is of two
kinds—good and had odours. And just as Taste is produced
and destroyed in Earth-atoms by the contact of tire, and
in the product it- is preceded by the Taste in the material
cause, and is destroyed by the destruction of its substratum,—•
so exactly is the case with odour also. No tteruality belongs
to odour.

Text {83}v Touch is perceptible by the Tactile or Cutaneous !
organ. It subsists in Earth, Water, Fire",
and Airi It aids the Tactile organ. It follows •{
upon Colour. It is of three hinds—cold, hofy
and neithcT-hot-nor-cold. The eternal'ity and ;
noa-ctevnality of this is as before,
i
Commentary.

|
i
Tactile or Cutaneous ororan means the Sense located in j
the Skin. It is by this alone that Touch is perceived.
J
It must exist in Earth &c. Touch helps the Cutaneous f
organ in perceiving its object." Ib follows upon Colour—that I
is, wherever there is Colour there is Touch also.
J
.if
It is of three kinds. 'Hardness' and 'Looseness' are parti-f
cular forms of conjunction of particles, and not any distinct
kinds of Touch.
;
Its' eternality is as before—i. c, as in the case of Tasted
and not as in the case of Odour ; as this latter has no eternal-^
ity.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES,

233

Text 84.—The process whereby the colour die. are produced
in the atom of Earth by baking is at follows-.—
When the unbaked jar and such other things are pat
into contact with fire, the strokes of the fire, or the
motion given rise to (by it) bring about certain
actions among the atoms composing tliat jar.
These actions bring abou^ disjunctions. (VII—ii—10).
From these disjunctions proceed destructions of conjunctions (IX—i—2.)
These destructions of the conjunction of component atoms
bring about the disruption of the composite substance
( far.) On the destruction of the composite substance,
the dark colour of the atoms rent taeunder becomes
destroyed by the contact of fire by the aid of its heat.
[Fag$ 1071- Further contact of those same atoms ivith fire,
aided by its heat, produces, in those atoms, the colour
which is said to be produced by baking. (VII—i—6.)
After this, the contact of the selves with these atoms, as
aided by the adrista (destiny) of the selves destined
to experience (tlie effects of the jar), produces action
in the atoms in which the colour has been produced
by baking. This action brings about the conjunction
of the atoms ; and from this conjunction proceed all
the composite substances from the Diad downwards.
In these component substances, the qualities of Colour &x.
are produced in accordance with like qualities in the
cause {component atoms). (VII—i—G, 7).
The destruction of the Colour &c, or their production, cannot take place in the composite substance itself-, as
(without disruption) the Rre cannot pervade over
the whole of the substance, over all its component
particles inside and out Nor would pervasion by
fire be possible by its entering into the atoms ; as
this would mean the disruption or destruction of
the component substance. (IV—iii).

234?

PRACASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

Commentary.
The author now proceeds to explain the process by which
the Colour &c. of the Earth-atom are produced and destroyed.
Though the 'Earth' itself is nothiug apart from the atoms, yet
the atoms are called 'parthiva' (of the earth), as compared with
the composite earthy substances (which alone are here intended
to be called 'prithivi, 'Earth*) ; the expression * atom of Earth1
would thus be explained as the ' atoms which are the cause of
the Earth;' and the author proceeds to explain the process where^
by Colour &c. are produced in these atoms, by baking.
Objection :—"If such be the intention, then this would not
"imply the presence of an lutention to explain the process of the
"destruction of certain colours—the dark colour of the unbaked
jar for instance."
» Reply : This is not right. This destruction also is implied
in the 'process;' as what the author does is to explain the process
which consists in the destruction of one set of qualities and the
production of another set, by baking.
The jar and such other things—the ' other things ' being
Earthenware cups and saucers and so forth.
Tho fire-coo tact produces certain actions in the component
particles of the jar,—and not in what is only in temporary con- %
tact with it, such for instant, as the water contained in the clay. :
As the 'component particles' of the jar are the atoms, it is these
latter that are the cause (substrate) of the actions produced by
the fire-contact.
By the strokes of fire or by the motion &c.—The Earthatoms are struck by the fire, or are set in motion by it—as we
shall explain ander the section of Action ' (Text, pp. 290-311.) ?
Thence follow disjunctions ; from disjunction, the destruction f
of conjunctions or contacts, from whence proceeds the destruc* 4
lion of the composite sulstance. That is to say, the actions set
in among the atoms bring about disruption among them, which
leads to the destruction of the diad and other composites. These 4

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

235

being destroyed, the atoms are rent asunder, the dark colour is
destroyed, and the red colour produced by baking.—that this is
so is proved by the fact that in all cases colour &c, are found
to be produced in a substance only when it is not hampered by
its effects,—i.e. when it exists in its own positive form. This
argument may be thus formally expressed :—'The qualities of
Colour &c. of the atoms are produced while they are in their
noD-composite state,—because they are such qualities as are
produced,—like the colour of the yarns.' That the former colour
is destroyed is proved by the appearance of another colour; it
being a well-recognised fact that a substance that already has
one colour, cannot have another colour produced in itself; the
argument being formally stated thus :—'The red colour is not
produced in substances which is already endowed with a colour,
because it is a colour,—like the colour of the yarns.' The destruction of the former colour of the atoms being thus proved,
the fire-contact, which was the cause of that destruction, still
persists ; as it is only while this is present that the consequent
destruction could take place; none else being possible. But
from this it should not be inferred that what was the cause of
the destruction of one colour is also the cause of the production
of another colour ; as in the case of the colour of the yarns, we
find, as a matter of fact, that what produces the mw colour is
something entirely different from what destroyed the former
colour. From this we conclude that the destruction of the colour
of the aiom is by something entirely different from what produces the other colour. The reasoning in support of this may
be put in this form :—'The destruction and production of the
colour in the atom cannot be due to the same cause,—because
they are such destruction and production of colour,—like the
destruction and production of the colour in yarns/
After this &c. The persons to experience are those persons
who would experience the pleasure and pain due to the production
of the jar; the 'adrishta' of those people are their merits and

23Q

PKAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

demerits; these aid the action of the conjunction of the atoms
with the selves of these persons, in bringing ahoutceitain actions
among the atoms in whom the fresh oolour &o. bave been produced by fire-contact. These actions bring about the conjunction or aggregation of the atoms ; and from the aggregation olf
atoms is formed the Diad ; by the aggregation of three diads it
formed the Triad; and so forth the composite substance, jar, is
produced.
The colour &c. in this jar are produced in accordance with
the colour &c. of the atoms composing it.—The colour of the two
atoms producing the colour of the Diad ; the colour of the two
Diads the colour of the Triads and so on, is the colour &c. of the
jar produced.
Number &c, are not produced by*baking; as they are
not of diverse character.
Objection: " We do not perceive any difference in the
character of the various kinds of Touch either."
Reply : True; but still it is by Inference that we ascertain
the fact of Touch being produced by baking;—as we have shown
in the sectiou on ' Earth;1
The conjunctive action in the atoms begins after the
production of the qualities by baking, and not at the time
of the destruction of the previous qualities ; as it is only in a
substance with colour that we find an action produotive of aaother coloured substance; and hence the action of the atom»
must be regarded a« appearing only in coloured atoms,—because
it is an action productive of a coloured thing,—like the action
of the threads productive of suoh combinations as bring about
the Cloth.
Question: u Why cannot you assume the fact of fire-contacfc bringing about the destruction and production of Colour
&o., ID. the products themselves (and not in the constituent
atoms) ? For certainly in the case of the baking of the jar we
distinctly see, when looking through a hole in the oven, that

QÜALITIB8 : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

237

the jar remains the same; aad even after the baking, it is recognised to be the same jar that had been, pat iato the fire."
[Pag© 109], Answer: N"a c<i dec. The author proceeds to prove
this: Sarvdvayavesku &c. If ehe fire outside the object were to
pervade over the object iaheriag a3 a whole ia every oae of it3
component pares,—fch«n, in as much as there would be no
contact pervading all over the object, there would be no certainty
as to the production or destruction of the products ; and hence
there would be no baking of the inner particles ; it is with
this view that the author has added—Sarvävayaveshw etc.
Objection: "All composite substances being porous, even
if the fire could not eater inside the object, it could pervade
over its atoms/'
Rsply : Anupravssidapi <&?. The atoms are not porous,
(ha7e no interstices), because they have no component parts; :
hence ii the diad had interstices it would not be produced at
all, a3 ther3 could be no combination between the two atoms, if
thare were any interstice between them; and if the two atoms
com bine, then there could be no interstice between them. As
ifa 13 only when two composite substances combine that there
are interstices due to their combining in parts only; in the
case of two non-composite substances, like two atoms, however,
there could be no such thing. Then again, in a gross material
substance we do not perceive any such interstices or pores ; in
the Triad alone there could then be such an interstice; and yet
tu*t too is not perceptible. Hence the assumption of the
opponent proves to be much too complicated.
Thus then the jar hiving no interstice, the atoms of fire
could not enter within these, until there were a disruption
of the Eirtb.-particles composing that jar.
Ia the o\84 of a tangible object haing struck by another
tangible object» it3 component particles become disjoined, and
ia accordance with t»ho process of disjunction &c, there appears

238

PKACASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA— CHAP. VI. SECTION (10>

the destruction of that Conjunction which keeps the object
in its composite state ; and on this there inevitably follows the
destruction of that object. And hence whence could there be
any manifestation of it, by the entrance of the atoms ? In all
products, there is no other destruction of iks^properties of
Colour &c., save in the destruction of the substances to which
they belong ; nor is there any production of these save out oflike properties in the material causes of those products. For
this same reason, we do not hold the destruction and production of Colour &o., to be due to the contact of the jar with fire.
As the Colour &c, of the jar are destroyed by the destruction
of the jar,—because they are such Colour &c, as belong to
products,—like the Colour of the jar destroyed by a stroke of
the stick ; and similarly, the Colour &c, of the jar are produced from like qualities in the material cause of the jar,—
because they are such Colour &c., as belong to products,—like
the Colour &c, of the Cloth.
Then again, in the case of the jar we find that before baking
its component particles are lose and disjointed,—and they become hardened after baking ; nor is there coexistence possible,
of looseness and hardness, like that of pressure and urging ; as
the two are mutual contradictions. Hence it must be admitted
that the former composite object has been destroyed, and a new
one produced in its place ; and thus the previous substance
having been destroyed, the new substance must be regarded
as brought about by some cause. As for the baked jar being
recognised to be the same as the unbaked one, this must be regarded as being due to their extreme similarity; just as in the
case of the flame. Then as for the fact of the jar being always j
perceived as a complete whole, during the time that it is being
baked,—this must be due to the fact of the jar being destroyed
gradually ; that is to say, the jar is not a mere aggregate of
atoms ; and as such it is not destroyed all at once, as soon aa
there is a disruption of the atoms ; as a matter of fact it is

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

239

made up of atoms, through Triads and Diads &c.; and hence
it is only after the numberless diads and triads have been
destroyed, that the jar is destroyed ; and hence so long as it
has not be^a destroyed, there is a perception of it. Then
again as the previous particles go on being destroyed, in their
places there goon being produced other particles having the
qualities produced by the baking ; hence what we see during
the time of baking, is the jar made up of baked and unbaked
particles.
110-] At the same time that the previous composite object becomes destroyed by the destruction of the component
particles,—there is a production of new component particles; and
the former composite object having been destroyed, there is a
production of a fresh composite object; and thus there would
be a restriction of the substratum of the new object. That is
to say,3 as many are the component particles of the previous
object, so many are the particles entering into the constitution
of the resultant object; and the magnitude and number of
particles in the latter are the same as those of the former.
The process involved in this m*ay be thus traced in its detail:—
the (1) destruction of the Diad, (2) the destruction of the Triad;
(3) the destruction of the Dark Colour (of the unbaked jar),
(4) the production, in the active atom, of a disruption due to
disjunction, (5) the production of the fire-contact productive
of the red Colour,—all this forming one point of time;—then
(6) the destruction of the Triad, (7) the destruction of the product of the Triad, (8) the production of the disruption due to
disjunction (9) the destruction of tbe conjunction, (10) the production of the fire-contact productive of the red Col »ar, (11)
the production of the red Colour, and (12) the destruction of the
fire-contact destructive of She Dark Colour,—these six forming
another point of time;—then (13) there is the destruction of
Its product, (14) the destruction of the product of that product,
(15) tbe production of the subsequent conjunction, (16) the pro-

240

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

auction of the red Colour &c, (17) the destruction of the firecontact destructive of the Dark Colour, (18) the appearance in
another atom, of the action productive of another object,—these
six constituting another point of time; (19) then the destruction of its product, (20) the destruction of the product of this
product, (21) the production of the subsequent conjunction,
(22) the destruction of the action, the disjunction and the disruption produced by this disjunction, (23) the production, in
the second atom, of the disjunction from. Ählgar (24) the destruction of the conjunction with that,—these six forming one
point of time;—(25) then the destruction of its product, (26)
the destruction of the product of this product, (27) the production of the subsequent conjunction of one atom with another,
(28) the production of the Diad, (29) the destruction of the
disjunction and the action, these five forming another point of
time;—(30) then the destruction of its product, (31) the destruction of the product of that product;, (32) the production of
the Diad, (33) the production of the Colour &c., of the Diad,
(34) the destruction of the disjunction and the action", (35) at)
the next moment, the production in the'Diad of qualities in
:
accordance with the qualities of its constituent atoms.
The same process may be applied to all the Diads compos-,
ing an object. In the production of the Triad &c., we need not
take into consideration any actions or operations ; as these are
produced from combinations born of conjunctions, by the following process : many atoms combine with one another at one
and the same time ; and thus the atom composing one Diad
combines with that composing another Diad; and one Diad
comes into contact with the atom composing another Diad;
then there comes about the combination of two Diads, and so on.
All this we have explained as we have been taught, so far
as we have been able to understand the process.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.
»

H

241

•

l

*

]

T

e

x

t

(

a

S

5

)

s

m

a

o

m

r

e

s

t

1

c

e

i

d

b

y

{

o

f

l

a

o

i

r

a

p

e

p

s

u

b

d

i

n

a

T

s

d

t

r

e

g

n

d

d

e

f

t

d

a

t

r

r

t

r

D

u

s

s

a

i

t

s

e

*

c

t

i

o

n

i

d

u

t

i

t

p

l

i

a

p

e

y

a

,

r

n

d

a

n

a

c

y

)

h

i

h

-

j

e

e

t

o

r

e

d

p

t

o

f

t

e

f

e

n

e

r

i

n

g

t

s

t

s

i

r

h

t

d

h

h

e

j

l

i

c

w

t

h

e

n

i

i

t

s

t

h

c

t

i

n

c

a

i

i

n

h

a

s

t

e

o

o

g

e

n

g

n

i

v

e

i

e

e

o

t

i

o

n

c

t

n

o

l

a

t

h

i

o

y

w

a

k

t

h

q

u

a

l

i

u

a

l

n

*

s

t

h

e

,

'

i

i

T

i

r

y

t

w

i

t

h

e

o

i

t

t

d

h

.

w

e

t

i

*

)

o

.

t

-

y

n

i

l

s

'

n

e

t

o

(

e

o

a

u

y

c

i

u

n

l

h

i

e

s

t

t

e

s

e

e

D

r

e

i

t

D

s

i

s

c

f

t

e

s

n

t

a

h

o

f

'

d

o

h

s

u

s

r

a

e

r

-

s

e

s

t

n

e

o

u

t

h

s

a

r

u

-

y

'

q

s

x

h

t

e

o

d

n

i

t

r

e

e

o

i

n

l

h

y

i

e

p

a

o

t

s

e

p

s

a

u

f

o

e

g

f

n

b

h

y

i

s

t

-

*

n

i

c

n

t

t

o

n

t

n

l

u

e

e

,

t

e

e

e

l

a

a

d

d

s

e

s

l

t

i

i

s

a

e

o

l

e

b

h

t

e

a

j

e

e

o

s

r

u

b

s

r

e

a

q

o

r

s

e

d

1

v

i

t

s

i

.

o

y

o

v

t

d

e

t

e

i

a

t

d

r

o

c

i

e

e

s

u

e

h

e

s

h

t

o

T

e

o

r

t

.

t

t

y

s

n

n

u

d

e

b

n

h

h

r

b

e

n

e

s

a

m

p

h

t

d

)

t

g

e

r

i

d

e

g

h

r

w

i

s

i

m

i

b

D

n

t

o

t

t

a

i

s

d

—

c

u

t

r

,

e

t

a

s

c

D

e

f

n

n

i

'

a

a

e

e

t

t

e

n

b

t

;

o

i

n

f

e

i

s

h

v

s

y

d

i

s

i

n

r

s

t

t

n

h

h

h

r

e

c

o

e

t

e

t

e

h

e

h

h

o

f

t

d

p

i

o

t

h

y

t

o

f

t

n

c

t

d

f

E

e

,

i

c

f

)

u

e

p

t

g

i

s

n

n

n

,

a

e

s

(

s

n

g

e

i

i

e

i

a

n

n

e

g

s

u

i

a

d

g

r

a

n

n

d

t

a

P

s

a

n

a

m

'

s

n

i

r

h

p

n

s

a

o

c

i

r

a

e

t

m

a

i

m

n

u

i

j

n

s

o

h

e

r

'

i

u

a

t

t

n

o

h

e

h

e

a

w

c

c

n

d

n

w

u

o

n

n

n

s

d

c

o

a

f

,

o

a

e

h

a

i

t

e

i

l

d

l

n

r

T

r

t

t

e

c

s

i

g

c

f

s

o

n

e

l

n

b

o

b

h

a

o

i

o

h

s

t

d

a

t

i

g

a

e

i

i

h

h

a

e

s

s

d

t

o

c

h

b

e

;

o

>

e

p

t

r

n

a

t

d

e

t

'

a

a

f

g

o

f

n

n

j

t

s

o

g

w

c

b

.

a

b

t

r

n

o

e

m

s

b

u

o

i

o

m

e

a

f

s

r

m

i

)

i

e

r

d

0

s

w

n

h

h

e

r

c

t

f

e

s

i

a

n

i

p

o

u

t

g

i

s

t

.

s

r

o

i

s

e

r

l

n

.

u

i

o

e

r

s

e

t

0

e

i

m

a

s

o

e

n

s

u

a

e

0

e

n

h

t

o

e

x

e

n

c

l

o

i

o

o

a

h

e

e

i

n

o

t

t

l

,

a

e

a

i

t

y

t

h

'

e

w

e

l

0

t

o

e

e

g

t

r

i

e

y

r

a

s

h

h

t

u

e

i

t

n

b

;

p

c

t

i

h

r

l

a

n

d

t

n

s

e

a

n

c

n

a

h

c

s

l

n

c

i

t

e

u

a

a

o

i

e

n

v

0

i

r

r

i

i

e

p

n

0

h

h

s

h

b

n

n

e

i

i

i

s

t

T

,

h

o

m

s

d

v

e

g

u

i

t

h

w

e

a

a

s

i

r

t

h

r

s

t

t

'

e

t

e

t

f

w

a

a

h

g

r

e

e

n

o

s

n

s

i

n

r

t

e

t

r

s

i

l

i

e

i

n

s

h

o

i

g

e

T

t

0

y

t

i

u

t

0

e

s

w

o

0

n

h

i

o

e

h

t

w

u

b

h

I

s

.

t

n

f

c

f

c

e

s

s

p

t

o

s

e

p

e

h

o

s

j

e

e

r

i

b

c

n

r

a

t

.

n

o

i

,

a

s

t

T

a

&

m

w

0

o

s

a

n

d

b

h

t

u

m

s

.

i

<

s

0

m

s

s

m

i

e

e

h

n

r

r

c

r

n

0

o

n

g

e

m

n

a

s

n

u

t

e

i

h

i

g

e

e

n

,

w

n

o

u

o

e

e

n

0

f

h

n

c

i

o

i

f

r

a

e

o

:

l

t

g

e

t

n

l

d

o

o

g

a

0

n

n

t

h

e

e

o

n

T

o

h

o

m

a

e

t

s

a

o

b

b

d

b

t

t

r

s

c

i

s

0

f

t

o

n

,

s

i

n

s

s

s

0

a

m

a

u

c

e

d

e

h

s

e

.

0

n

b

e

c

e

i

u

f

h

n

(

p

i

u

s

s

n

a

e

y

t

t

n

e

a

f

N

o

n

n

o

.

'

.

h

e

t

h

e

n

t

y

y

,

n

(

o

f

242

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).
each of the substances) leads to the destruction
of the quality of Duality; as the notion of
the quality of Duality is the cause of the destruction of the generic idea of 4Duality'; and
simultaneously with this destruction of the
quality of Duality, there arises the idea of the
substances, as * two substances/ out of the
quality of Duality, its cognition and its relationship. Then there arises the actual cognition
of Substance, as ' two substances,' and the disappea; anceof Duality, ivhic/t Lads to the idea of
Duality as a quality; and simultaneously with
this there arises this impression out of the
cognition of the Substance. Then from the
cognition of the Substance there follotos the destruction of the idea of Duality as quality; and ;
that of the idea of Substance also, from the I
Impression (left by the previous conceptions).

Page 112 ] The same process wovXd also apply to the case
of the notions of " three " and the rest. As
these also proceed out of unities as accompanied by the idea of many substances; and dis-:,
appear on the disappearance of the distinctive
conception of each object.
In certain cases these notions {of ' Duality' dec) are des-\
troyed by the destruction oj the substrates them-]
selves. To explain:—When a certain action ha$
commenced in that particle which is the suhstra-\
tarn of unity, and there arises a generic idea of,
' unity91 the said action set ves to disjoin that par*tide from the other particle, whence there arises
the distinctive idea {of each of the particles^
Hence, at the very time that there is a destruction
of Conjunction by the said Disjunction, there

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

24£

appears Duality, and the destruction of Conjunction leads to the destruction of the object {as
a whole), and the appearance of the generic idea.
At the very time that the generic idea destroys
the distinctive idea, it is only natural that
there should be a destruction of Duality, on
account 0/ the destruction of its very substrate.
All this is quite compatible with the theory that whenever
an idea appears it always destroys the idea
that preceded it. In case however the incompatibility between two ideas consisted merely
in the improbability of their coexistence, theie
would be no appearance of the cognition of the
Substance. Because the distinctive idea having been destroyed simultaneously with the
idea of quality, and leading to the desttuction
of Duality, there would be no possibility of any
such cognition of Substance as ' two substances'.
Objection: "As in the case of inferential cognition, so
here also (we would have the cognition of the
substance) from merz cognition. That is to
say, it has been explained under the Sütra
'Abhütam bhütasya {lll-i-II) that in certain
cases we have inferential knowledge, even in
the absence of a definite Middle Term, from
mere cognition; in the same manner, in the
case in question, even though the quality {Duality) may have been destroyed, yet from the
mere cognition of that quality there would
proceed the cognition of the Substance {as 'two
substances')"
Reply: Not so; because the cognition in question is of
the Substance as qualified {by Duality); and in
as much as the qualification enters into the very

PRAQASTAPÄDA BfllSHYA—CHAP. VL SECTION (10).
essence of the qualified object, there could be no
cognition of the latter without some connection with the qualification* This is what has
been declared by the author of ike sutra, under
VIlI-i-9: 'The cognition of the white otyect
proceeds from the cognition of the whiteness
inhering in that object; and these same stand
"*v".,
in the relation of cause and effect! The case
^J,
of inferential knowledge is different, as in
£
that the knowledge produced is not such as
makes the subject of the conclusion identical
{with the mark or Middle Term). It cannot
be argued that at the time of the cognition
of the substance there is no actual destruction of the idea of the quality {of duality)
because of extremely quuk appearance. That is
to say, just as in the case of the nation 'the
ÄMca (T) is endowed (#) with sound (3)' we
\
find three distinct cognitions appearing quickly \
one after the othert so Gould it as reasonably
be in the case of the appearance of the cognition :\
of Duality &c, (i e., in the cognition'two I
substances,* the idea of'substance' appears after
that of 'two* has disappeared ; but it appears J
so quickly upon the wake of the other, that the \
sequence is scarcely perceptible, and gives rise J
to the idea that the two are simultaneous).
|
Objection : %tThe objection that you bring forward would j
apply equally in the case of your own theory^
of one cognition destroying another. That « |
to say, in that cast also, there would be no cog-\
nition of the Substance. Because simultane-j
ously with the generic idea of 'duality* therij
appears the Impression, which destroys all
distinctive idea/'

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

245

Reply: Not so; because what bikings about the impression
is the collective post-cognition {of all the/actors
concerned) and not the mere perceptive cognition (which alone is held to disappear as soon
as it is produced). Consequently the said
objection (of the impossibility of the cognition
of Substance) cannot apply to our theory.
Objection: "In that case there would be a simultaneity
of cognitions, if the incompatibility of cognitions consisted in the fact of one of them being
the destoyer of another"
Rtfly: Not so; because what is denied by the Sütra
'jnänäyaugapadyät') is the possibility of the
simultaneous existence of two such cognitions as
donot destroy each other; that is to say, what
ii denied is the idea that two cognitions can
appear simultaneously and that they can
coexist, without the one destroying the other;
and in the case of the theory of one cognition
being the destroyer of another, there is no possibility either of the simultaneous appea ranee of
two cognitions, or of the coexistent* of these,
without the one destroying the other. (Hence
this theory i* quite in keeping with the declaration of tke * non-simultaneity of cognitions ) .
Commentary,
Though the form and* existence of Number are wellknown, yet there are some people whose intellects are clouded
by utterly mistaken views, and who deny its existence. And
it is with a view to these that the author says e'kddi &c.,
1
Vyavahdra ' may be taken as equivalent to ' vyavahfti',
'Use' 'knowledge of what is to be known;' and it may also
be taken aa ' vyavahriyate anAna,' ' that by means of which
usage is carried on,' i. e.t the word expressing the idea. Hence

246

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

the word 'Ekxdivyavakära would mean the idea or knowledge
as well as the words, of * dha ', 'one' and the rest; and the basis
of this is what is called ' number.' The argument may be
thus stated : The idea of * one' &c, is due to a qualification,
because it is a qualified idea, like the idea of * the man with the
stick.' la the same manner, we can substitute ' word ' for
'idea' in this same argument ; and the reason would be stated
is the form * because it is a qualified word. '
Objection :—" The ideas in question are only ideas of Colour
and such other properties, (and not of any distinct quality in
the shape of Number). "
Reply:—Not so ; because the ideas of 'one* &c, are found
to be totally different from those of Colour &c. That is to say;
the ideas of Colour are in the forms of ' blue, ' ' yellow ' &c,
and not in those of * one, ' * two ' &c.
i
\
J5.
1
Objection:—" Then we miy regard these ideas to have
no corresponding substratum ; and we donot know of any obiects
apart from these, Colour &c.
Page 114] Reply :—We ask—Whence then come the specific
forms of« one ' * two * &c, ?
Objection:—"They are due to the fruition of the Väsaanä
(Tendencies or Impressions) encased in the Älayavijnäns, or
Receptive Consciousness of the parson having those ideas. "
Reply :—In that case we may attribute the ideas of
* Blue' &c, also to the same source ; for we do not perceive any
difference, bet ween the blue, yellow &c, on the one hand, and |
one, * two ' &C., on the other,—as forming objects of cognition; and hence we can have no grounds for believing the one
to be based upon a real substratum, and the other to have no jj
such 8ubatratura.
Objection:—*' There is this difference between the two :|
While the form of' blue ' is real, that of * number' is unreal and
mistaken. n

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

247

-.—There is not much in this argument; as there are
no grounds for believing the form of blue also to be real ; as there
can be no corroboration of any such idea ; as that particular
form belongs (according to you) to that idea alone, and lasts a
single moment (and as such it does not stay long enough to be
corroborated). For the same reason, no effective action could
belong to such a form. Nor do wo ever recognise any similarity
between the form of one idea which is restricted to that idea
alone, a'nd those of other ideas ; and hence it is not possible to
bave the necessary corroboration based upon such similarity ;
specially as in all cases we donot always perceive similar forms;
there are many instances of our perceiviug forms that are not
similar at all.
Nor again, can the unmistaken character of 'form of blue'
be said to be due to its being born of an 'object'; because so
long as the oUject itself is not duly cognised,-there cm be no
certainty of its being born of au ' object ' ; and if the object
were to be cognised by other means of knowledge, then the
assumption of a 'form' from another source would be absolutely
useless; and if the object were heU to be established from the
cognition of the ' form ' alone, then, in that case, the object
could be accomplished on the strength of the cognition of the
unmistaken form, and the fact of this cognition being born of
or based upon the object would be dependent upon the accomplishment of the 'object, '—and this would involve a most
undesirable interdependence.
As for not being set atide> this belongs to the blueform, as well as to the form of number, as imprinted upon
the cognition.. Any setting aside would be impossible, as
regards the object itself (this setting aside being of the cognition alone); and as such it could never be conceived of with
regard to the blue colour it3elf, as all such Colours are very
far removed from the cognition,—between which and the Colour
there is the intervening form (of the Colour). Hence it is

PBAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10),
that in all eases what is cognised is oae form (or shape). And
because any one condition might be fouad to have originated
from a non-object (i. 0., an object having DO real existence)
it does not necessarily follow that all other cognitions a.re the
same. Thus then the real existence of the Blue &c., could
notba proved.
Objection :—" There being no external object, the fimition,
or develop me ub, of the tendencies (bfuivanä) would be dependent solely upon their own. series (santdna) ; and as such
there would be no restriction a3 to their appearence inly at
certain times, and not at all times ; and hence the blue-form \
itself which (according to the Idealist) depends upon these j
same developments (in the form o£ cognitions), would not f
have any such restriction ; and this would justify the dssump«
Jtion of the Blue &c. "
f
Reply :—If the form3 of one, two &c, did not depend f
upon external objects, there could be no restriction as to their 5
being cognised only at certain times ; and hence it would be
necessary to assume the existence oi Number also ; as the J
reasons for such assumption in this case are exactly th$ same
as those in the case of Blue &c.
Some people have held that Number has no existen e apart
from Substances. But this is not right. Because in the case j
of a number of trees close to one another, seen from a distance,— *
even though their oneness &c, are not perceived,—their shape is ,
distinctly preceived (and Number is nothing different from these j
shapes perceived as distinct). It would also be perceived along 1
with a real existence. This same argument would also provej
the fact of Number being something distinct from the Subs-1
tance ; even when we cannot see the Colour, we distinctly see j
the object as $ substa nee,
j
The form of Number having thus been proved to have a j
real existence, the author proceeds to describe its various1
kinds Sdpunah&c. 'Ekadravya' is that number wljich in-

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

24-9

heres in a single substance ; ' anekaäravyü * is that inhering
in substances more than one ; the particle ' ca ' serves to
indicate that these two are the only kinds of numbers.
Page 115-3 Q^t °f these two, the number belonging to one
Substance may be shown to be eternal and non-eternal, in the same
manner as the Colour &c, of the atoms of water &c. That is to
say* just as in the water-atoms, Colour, Taste and Touch are
eternal, so also is the number 'One' (belonging to such an atom);
and just as the Colour &c, of aqueous products are non-eternal,
being destroyed at the destruction of their substratum, and
being produced in accordance with the Colour &c, of the originative aqueous substance,—so also is the number ' one ' (as
belonging to sucrf products).
The number inhering in more than one substance includes
all numbers from two to the highest conceivable number.
'Parardha* is that at which all limitation of number ceaeeA
The particle ' tu' is added with a view to show that ' duality '
differs from 'unity' in point of belonging to more than one
substance.
This second sort of number is not a mere aggregate of the
quality of many unities ; it is produced out of many unities
as accompanied by the notion of many objects ; and it
disappears on the destruction of the ' distinctive notions.'
'Khalii,' is meant to lend force to the declaration. We must explain 'ckatvebhyati as equivalent to 'ektave ca, ekatvdni ca,
tebhyah * ; otherwise the assertion would not include the origin
of duality (which proceeds from two unities only, which
would be expressed by the word 'ckatve' and not by 'ekatväni')
So also, in thej clause, accompanied hy the 'notion of many
objects, the word 'aneka must be taken in this literal sense of
1
not one, * as applying to tivo as well as to more than two.
The author now proceeds to prove the aforesaid assertion by
means of a discussion, beginning with the question " How ? "

250

PXtAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI, SECTION (10)

At the time that there is a direct contact of the perceiver's eye with, two like things, as two jars, or with two
unlike things, like the jar and a piece of cloth,-—then there
arises a knowledge of the unity inhering in the two
unities belonging to the two objects; as the knowledge of
the qualified object is always brought about by the knowledge of the qualifications ; and f unity' is the qualification of the properties of the two units; we take into consideration the knowledge of the singleness. But a visual
cognition is never possible without proximity; and hence we
have shown that unity 13 related to the sense-organ (of
vision) by the relationship of inherence in that (unit) which
inheres in the thing (jar) which is in direct contact with the
organ.
The knowledge of 'unity* having thus been produced,
that singleness becomes related to the two qualifying unities;
and from the said knowledge there follows a single idea with
regard to the two qualifying unities; the organ (in the
case of visual*perception) is one only, because of the impossibility
of both Eyes being simultaneously enlivened by the internal
organ ; and thus in all cases, the perceiving being done by one
organ only, the presence of another eye would be wholly useless.
Consequently ifc is held that the two eyes together constitute the
organ of vision ; and in all cases of visual perception, it is from
both eyes that rays of light proceed ; these rays of light come
into contact with the object perceived ; in the same way as the
rays of light emanating from a lamp in the house strike the outside object through two apertures in the wall. What is enlivened
and guided by the Internal Organ is the Visual Organ directly
by itself, and not through its relationship with the object; as
the Internal Organ never moves out of the body; and as such it
gives rise to the cognition only by means of its relationships
established through the Visual Organ. And thus it becomes
possible, through the power of the causes of perception, to have
a aimn^aneous cognition of more than one object. Though the

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

251

power or potency of the causes is such, yet it gives rise to only
one cognition afc a time; because the contact of the Soul and the
Internal Organ (which is a necessary element in the cause of
cognition) is capable of producing a singie cognition at) a time.
PagO 116] It is on account of this fact, that we have 'determinate' or'concrete ' cognitions as well as * non-determinate' or
'abstract' ones; because there come up, in such cases, a number of
impressions of several objects of verbal conventions; these impressions becoming operative give rise to certain remembrances; and
then through the force of the contact of the Soul and the Internal
Organ, there appears a single cognition accompanied by the remembrance of several objects.
Question : "Granted that there has appeared a single idea
with regard to several qualities;—what then?"
Answer : Then on the basis of this idea, the two unities
the qualities of ' one/ produce, in their substrate, duality.
In this, the two substrata constitute the fnaterial, and
the two qualities of ' one' the immaterial, and the idea of
several objects, the instrumental or efficient, cause.
When there appears a single id<.a with regard to the two
qualities of 'one,' then the two unities produce duality;—this is spoken of as constituting one point of time vis. the 'lava*
made up of two moments or * hshanas.' If we oalculated in
terms of the moment alone, then the time involved in tb*e
production of duality could not be spoken of as one; as the
cause (the ideas of two unities) and its effect (the duality)
appear at distinct moments.
Nor is there anything very uncommon in the production
of an object (duality) from an idea (of two unities); because we find such objects as pleasure and pain proceeding from
ideas. Nor can it be rightly argued that we have never found
any external object being produced by Ideas, Because whether
the effect is internal or external is a mere mioor detail;
the fact of being invariably concomitant with Ideas is common
to both cases (of internal and external effects).

252

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI, SECTION (10).

Objection: "It having been fully established that Duality is
manifested by the substratum of the two qualities (of unity), *
it could not be proved that Idea is tlje immediate antecedent *
(cause) of that (duality)."
Reply : Not so ; because that would lead to an absence |
of all restrictions. That is to say, if Duality were not born of '
Ideas, then, like Colour &c, it could be perceived by other I
persons also, as there would be no restricting cause; whereas J
when it is born of Ideas, it can be perceived by that person |
alone by whose ideas it is produced. The argument may be f
stated in this syllogistic form:—Duality is born of ideas,—because ifc is always cognised by a single person—that which is
always cognised by a single person is always born, of ideas
e. g. Pleasure &c,—Duality is always cognised by a single
person,—hence it must be born of ideat
The production of Duality having been explained, the
author next proceeds to describe the means of cognising it—Tatah punak &c. i. e. after the production of Duality, there arises
a cognition of Quality in general {i. e. the generic form of Duality). Herein also the cause of cognition lies in the inherence of
something inhering in a thing that is in contact (with the cognitive j
organ). The expression 'punah' has been added with a
view to distinguish 'Duality' from 'Unity' in general. The
generality 'Duality' is a qualification of the quality of Duality;
and so long as the qualification is not coguised, there can be
no cognition of the qualified. It is for this reason,—for the
purpose of explaining the means of cognising the qualified
(quality of Duality),—that the author has begun with pointing \
out the means of cognising the qualification, the generality j
'Duality/ That this generality exists is also evidenced by the i
idea of 'Duality' qualified by the idea of the generality 'Duality1; j
and the idea of Duality again is proved by the idea that we
have in the form 'two objects' The argument may be thus |
stated:—The idea of'two objects' is preceded by the idea of |

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

253

the qualification Duality,—because it is an idea of a qualified
thing,—like the idea 'man with the stick.' And the idea of the
qualification having been thus inferred, the idea also being in its
turn found to be one of a qualified thing ( the qaality of Duality
as qualified by the generality of 'Duality'), comes to be inferred as
being preceded by the idea of that qualification.
Page 117] Some people hold that both the qualification and the
qualified form the substrates of a single idea. But, say others,
what would these people say with regard to the case of the idea
of 'fragrant sandal-wood'? For certainly the Eye (organ of
visual cognition) cannot comprehend odour (fragrance) ; and the
nose (the organ of odour-perception) pan not see the object
(sandal wood); and hence these two organs cannot be accepted as
comprehending or perceiving the relationship between fragrance
and the sandal-wood, as the perception of relationship would
depend upon the perception of the two factors related. As for
insiance, direct perception of recognition, produced by senseaction and Impression (respectively) is found to pertain to the
past and the present, simply on account of the power of the two
causes (Sense-action and Impression).- In the same manner, the
cognition 'fragrant sandalwood' must be regarded as brought
about by the joint action of the Eye and the Nose ; and the fact
of its pertaining to two objects (odour and sandaiwood) is due
to t}ie power of the two sense-organs.
This however is not quite right; "as a Cognition or Idea is
not a thing made up of parts; if the Idea were something
made up of several parts, then alone could there be any possibility of one part of it being produced by the Nose and another by
the Eye. As it is however, the Cognition is one impartite
whole, sensed by means of the two organs, and comprehending the odour as well as the substance possessing the odour.
From this it would follow that the odour is cognisable by the
Eye, and the substance by the Nose; for the simple reason that
the cognisability of a thing by an organ depends solely upon the
fact of that thing beiog the object of cognition produced by that

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).
organ. But the Mind being atomic, it could not operate upon
two senseorgaos at one and the same time. Hence it must
be admitted that what occurs in the case in question is
that the odour is at first perceived by the Nose; and then
what the Eye does is to briDg about the cognition only of the
substance qualified by that odour; and thereby it aids the I
previous cognition of the odour. This must be admitted by )
all disputants, whether they like it or not.
?
Such then being the case, with regard to all cognitions of |
qualified things, we may lay down the following" principle: 'The j:
cognition of the qualified thing in question refers to the qualified
thing alone (and not to the qualification),—because it) is a cognition of the qualified thing, obtained by means of the senses,—like i
the cognition of the 'fragrant sandal-wood?' We have added the
qualification ' obtained by means of the senses' in order to
exclude inferential knowledge.
Objection : " If the mere form of the substance be the substratum of the cognition of a qualified thing, then such a cognition could be possible even when there would be no qualification,
It might be argued that, in as much as the qualification would
be the originative cause of the cognition in question, the said
contingency of fche cognition of the qualified thing appearing
in the absence of qualifications would not be possible. But in.
any case the cognition of the qualified substance would not differ f
from that of the substance itself independently of the qualifica- §
tion, because when there would be no difference in the objects I
cognised, there could be none in the cognition. *
Reply:—All this is not possible ; because we do not admit of j
the supposition you pufr forward. That is to say, we do not hold
that the cognition of the qualified thing has for its substratum
the form of the thing alone; what we hold to be that substratum
is the qualified thing; and certainly the character of being qualified is something distinct from the mere form of the thing;
for instance, in the case of the idea of 'man wielding a stick',

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AttD DISSIMILARITIES

255

what is cognised is not the form of the man alone, uor the mere
presence of tk& stick; but a man differing1 from other men; and
this difference lying only in the fact of his carrying a stick. Ife
is for this reason that the qualification is called the'differentia'
(that which differentiates); for instance the stick bringing about
the cognition of its subserviency (or belonging) to the WÄ//,
serves to differentiate him from other men; It is in this point
that lies the difference of the viceshana (Differentia, Inseparable or Inherent Property) from the upalakshana ('some feature
purely accidental'). This latter also serves to distinguish the
object to which it belongs, but it does not bring about the cognition of its own subserviency. For instance, in the case of the
word 'dantfin* (man with the stick) the idea produced is that of
the stick being subservient to the man; but in the case of the
expression 'jatäbhistäpasah' (the ascetic marked by the matted
locks), the presence of the locks is not recognised as necessarily
subservient to the ascetic. What is meant by the subserviency
of the stick is that the 'man is the predominating factor'; in
view of his effective actions, wherefrom the fruits of experiences
accrue to him.
Objection: " In that case the character of the qualification
and the qualified is not absolute, but only relative."
Reply: Not so; do not you know that the character of
the Agent and the Instrument also is absolute as well as
relative? All this wa have explained in detail in the Sangrahafikä.'
Page 118-] Dvüvasämänya-jfianät ap&shä-buddhervinagyattd. By apekshdbuddhi is meant the cognition of the two
Unities; and this cognition is destructible by the knowledge of
the generality of 'Duality'; i.e. the cognition is brought into
contact with it3 destructive cause by this generality. And in as
much as this generality is related to the quality of duality, and
is cognised as along with this quality, from it originates the
cognition of the quality of duality; which is brought into
close proximity with its productive cause by that generality.

256

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

Thus the cognition of the generality of ' Duality' is destructive
of the Apekslul-buddhi and productive of the cognition of
the quality of Duality,—both of these, the destruction and the
production, being simultaneous.
Thus then, the destruction of Apekshä-buddhi becomes
the cause of the destruction of Duality ; as while the former fs
present, the latter is never found to exist. Hence the destruction of the Apelcshä-buddhi constitutes the destructibility of
Duality. We often find a thing being destroyed by its instrumental or efficient cause; as when the last Perception of the
Truth is destroyed by the destruction of the body, on the
occasion of final Deliverance.
Theft again, the cognition of the quality ' Duality ' is tbe f
jause. of the destruction of the coguition of the generality |
* duality'; because one cognition is not compatible with ,j
another cognition (that is to say, two cognitions cannot 1
coexist simultaneously). And the cognition of the quality would j
also be the cause of the cognition of the substance to which j
the quality belongs. And thus the appearance of the cognition
of the quality would mean the destruction of one coguition, and
the appearance of another.
Dvitvagunajnänasartibawdkebhyah—i. e. From out of
(1) the quality of duality, (2) the cognition, and (3) the relationship, there follows the cognition, in the form 'two substances' ; and this appearance of the cognition of the substance means the destruction of Duality, which in its form means
the, destruction of the cognition of quality,—all these three
occurring at one poiut of time. Though at the time of the
appearance of the cognition of ' two substances ' there is no
Duality, yet that is its cause ; and certainly there is no use
in the actual continuance of the cause at the time of the produc-'
tion of the effect; specially as the potency of the cause lies only •;
in. Its bringing about an operation tending towards the pro-!
duction of the effect; and hence if this has been done by the ]

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AttD DISSIMILARITIES.

957

cause, what would be ihe^use of its continuance actually at the
time of the production o( the effect ? For it would act as the
cause through its operation (even when it would have disappeared after having set up that operation). ISfor would this
reduce the cause to the position of the secondary cause, the
TfrjL causal efficiency belonging to the said operation. Because
the causal efficiency cannot be regarded to have ceased merely
with the intervention of the action ofthat same cause. If it were
sot then in a case where a man has shot an arrow, and has
been immediately struck dead by a stroke from behind, the
man would not be regarded as the cause of the shooting
of the arrow.
After that the cognition of the substance brings about the
destruction of the cognition of the quality, and appearajace
of the "sanskära" (Faculty or Impression). Then the
appearance of this sanskdra means the destruction öf the
cognition of the substance. And at the next moment the
sanskära destroys the cognition of the substance. The fact
of the sanskära beiüg the cause of this destruction of the
cognition of the substance is inferred from the said destruction
appearing only when the sanskära is present, and never
otherwise.
The above explanation of the production of Duality, bolda
good with' regard to the production of 'three' &c. These also
are produced out of many singlenesses accompanied by the
notijn of 'many' and destroyed by the destruction of the
Apekshabuddhi.
Page 119.] The same explanation may be applied to the cases of
the numbers 'hundred 'and the rest also. That is to say, when
each unity has been cognised by itself, these cognitions give
rise to impressions in the same order as themselves ; and after
the last unity has been cognised,-there becomes manifested
an unseen potency tending to establish the usage or idea of
'hundred1; and the contact (of sense) being one only, there
appears a single remembrance of objects more than one ; and
18

258

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄ9HY A-HCHAP. VI.

then these two Apekshabuddhia, in the forms of direct cognition
and iudirect remembrance, produce the number ' hundred ' in
reference to their own substrate. This Number is affected by
the impressions of all the substances (included in that number)
and this must be regarded as perceptible directly by the senses,
in as much as it forms the object of the cognition produced fcy
the sense-organ coming into contact with the last (hundredth)
substance.
Objection : "In many cases it so happens that we have the
collective idea of a number ('hundred* for instance) after
the things- to whom the number belongs have been destroyed ;
e. g. we have the notion—' I have killed a hundred insects/
In this case, how would you explain the production of the
number ' hundred' ? As in this case there is no substratum
v/herein the number could be produced ?"
Reply: In such a case the namber is not produced, for
want of the necessary substratum. As for the use of the word
'hundred7, it must be regarded as secondary or figurative, just
as In the case of Colour &c. Such is the explanation given by
some people.
Others again hold that the idea of the number is exactly
similar in both cases (i. e. when the things exist, as also when
they are destroyed ); and as such it is not right lo take the
use of the word to be secondary or figurative. Hence they
told, tHat the substratum of the number consists in the things
destroyed which existed in the\past, and which are recalled
by remembrances of them. It is only such things as are absolute
non-entities—like the ' sky-flower* and the like—\vhioh* cannot
serve as the required substratum. As for those that have
oxisted in the past though they are not connected with the
present time, and their forms also are uot present a« thö tiine
in question, yet they become the material cause of the nufflifotj
by being brought over to the present by means of memory,\
as aided by auxiliaries, the nature of which is qp\tß coropatitya
with reason. Nor would this theory entail the absurdity of

QUALITIES .• SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES,

259

tho possibility of such number being produced in any and every
place. Because the said assumptions are made only in accordance with (and for the purpose of explaining) directly perceptible facts (which themselves cannot be denied).
It might be argued that if the past things could oe the
cause (of the number ), then, in as much as direct cognition
would be the cause of the necessary remembrance, there would
be no use of assuming a santkava.
But it is not so ; because the direct cognition is utterly
destroyed ; and as such it could not have any causal potency
unless it were recalled (by means of some such agency as that
of Sanshdra); and hence for the sake of its recalling, it
becomes necessary to postulate the Satiskära. In the case of
a Word, at the time that the last letter of the word is heard,
though the preceding letters have all been destroyed, yet they
are recalled to memory, and as such serve as the efficient
cause in the denoting of the meaning of the whole word.
In the same manner, such recalled thiugs may serve as material
causes also. Then too, just as the mind aided by the Satiskära, has the capability of remembering external thing's, so,
in the same manner, it must be admitted, on the ground of
palpable facts, that it has the power of bringing about direct
cognition. Nor would this involve the impossibility of deafness, blindness &c; because the operation of the mind depends
upon the functioning of the external organs of perception.
In a case where Duality is produced with regard to two
things, one of which has been totally destroyed, and which is
recalled by memory,—its destruction is due to the destruction of
the Apehshdbuddhi in the form of remembrance. And in the
case where Duality is produced while the substratum is extant,
it is destroyed, not only by the destruction of the Apekshabuddhi itself, but, in some cases, by the destruction of the
substratum also; because there can be no notion of ' two'
when either one or both of the two objects are destroyed.
This is what is meant by the assertion

260

PBA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI.

The author' proceeds to explain this in answer to the
question—* how ?'—put by an ignorant person;— Yadä &c.
at the time when an action is produced in a part of the subttance qualified by singleness, there arises the cognition of
the generality ' Unity' inhering in the quality of singleness.
And at the next point of time the said action separates that
park from another part, and the cognition of the generality of
'unity1 brings forth the Apgkskabuddhi; and then, at the I
very time that the disruption of the composite substance brings f
about the destruction of the conjunctive adhesion of the subs- 1
tanca, there is produced Duality out of the Apekshäbuddhi; and !
the destruction of the conjunction destroys the substance, and
there is produced the cognition of the generality of' Duality';
—»all this constituting one point of time.
[Page 120*] When the cognition of the generality of 'Duality'
destroys the Apekshäbuddhi, then the destruction of the
substratum, leads to the destruction of Duality ; and the cause
of this latter destruction is not the destruction of the
buddhi; because the two are found to co-exist.
Though there is no useful purpose served by the p
duction of Duality which is destroyed without having givenf
rise to the idea of ' two substances',—yet the production of|
the effect is such as is sure to come about whenever there is
an efficient cause, and it is not necessary that there should be
a useful purpose to be served by it ; and hence what we have
considered is only the production of the effect ( Duality ).
By means of the above process of the production of Duality, J
it has been shown that one cognition destroys that which has
gone before it; this destruction is possible only when there
is an apposition between the two cognitions; and this opposi-;
tioo some people hold to be of the same nature as that between
the killer and the killed ; while others regard it to be of the
nature of mere incompatibility «of co-existence ; and the author,
accepting the former view, a&y&-~-Qobhanametad-vidhänan,
Ktadvidhnnam refers to the aforesaid process of the production

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

$ßj

of Duality. la accordance with the theory that the Opposition
between two cognitions is of the same nature as that between
the killer and the killed,—the second cognition having been
produced ab the next moment destroys the cognition of the
previous moment; and this is quite proper. In accordance
with the other view of' opposition ' however, the production or
appearance of one cognition would be the destruction of another cognition (the appearance of the one constituting the
destruction of the other, both of which therefore would never be
simultaneous); and in accordance with this view it would not
be possible for the idea of'two substances' to be produced ;
and as such this theory cannot be right. This is what the
author means.
He further explains this same thing—Katham &c.
In accordance with the second theory, the Apikshdbuddhi
would be destroyed at the time of the appearance of Duality;
and this would lead to the destructibility of Duality; and the
destruction of Duality would be simultaneous with the
cognition of the quality; and hence at the second moment of
time there could be no production of the cognition of'two
substances', which requires Duality; as there would be no
cause for that production.
Objection: "Lairigikavat <bc. This is further explained
" SydnmcUm <&o. Your view appears tobe that, just as in a
11
ease where the man is inferred from a particular kind of sound
"or voice that is heard, it is only when the distinguishing
"feature of the sound is known that it becomes a means of infer" emce of the man existing at the present time, even though it
"is itself destroyed and does not exist at the time of the Inference ; and hence it is the mere idea of the distinguishing*
"mark which, even though the ' mark ^itself be not existent»
"is enough for bringing about the inferential knowledge
"—so also even though Duality were destroyed at the time
"of the Cognition of the quality, the mere idea of Duality could
" bring about the cognition of' two substance«'."

2G2

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI.

j

" Some people offer the following explanation : The action *
" of rain which does not appear becomes the inferential mark of j
" the past contact of the wind and the cloud ; (and proves that 1
" the clouds have been driven adrift by the wind); and in this
"case evea though the rain does not exist yet it is the mere
" idea that serves as the inferential mark. "
" But this explanation is not satisfactory; because in the
"case of this inference, it is uot the action of rain that is the
" inferential mark; but it is the absence of rain which leads
" to the inference ; and certainly this absence is present at the
"time; as-while the thing (rain) has not been brought about
** its prior negation remains intact. Hence the argument that
"we have put forward above is what should be brought for-'
'* ward here."
i
The above objections are answered thus :—Not so ; because]
the cognition in question is of the Substance as qualified (by\
Duality). It is not a fact that the cognition of 'two substances'
proceeds from mere cognition pure and simple; because, as a
matter of fact, the cognition involves the idea of the Substance
also. Another question :—"Even granting that the cognition
is that of the Sabstance, why cannot the cognition in question
be regarded as proceeding from the mere cognition (independently
of the substance.)?" The answer to this is—It is not &o. The
sense is that the qualification constitutes the very form of that
which it qualifies; it is the very source of the idea of its own
subserviency to that thing which it qualifies ; and that
does not exist cannot qualify another thing ; as that which
not exist cannot be the source of any idea; consequently no cognition of the qualified thing can be possible without its involving'
the cognition of the qualification also. The auther adds the
corroboration of Kanada to his interpretation :—This, ie what
has been declared <£c. Kanada has declared that the cognition
of the 'white object' proceeds from the cognition of the whiteness
inhering in that object; and that for this reason there is the:

QUALITIES : SIMILAIUTIES AND DISSIMILARITIES

263

relation of cause and effect between the cognition of the qualification and that of the qualified object ; and this causal relation
cannot subsist between non-existing things ; hence the 'qualification cannot be regarded as absolutely absent (in the cognition of what it qualifies.) By the particle ltio the author proceeds
to ehow the difference between inferential cognition-and cognition
of the qualified substance: Na in &c. Inferential cognition conceives
of,the inferential 'mark' ( middle term ) as. subordinate to the
Major terra and as such does not point to an idendity
between these two (as the qulified cognition does with regard to
the qualification and the qualified); and bence the instance cited
ii not quite appropriate. That is to say, the case of Inferential
knowledge is not at all akin to the cognition ol "two substances."
Objection: "At the time of this latter cognition, even
Duality does not exist; and then how could the cognition be
qualified by it ? "
lleply : Not so ; because at the moment immediately preceding the cognition Duality does exist; and in all cases the
direct cognition of Duality has for its object something existing
at the previous moment and as a matter of act, immediately before
the congnition of'two substances,' Duality does exist; and as such
it is sure to form part of the following cognition. It might be added
that, just as the substance appears in the cognition of " two
substances," so also does the Duality belonging to it. Nor is it
possible for the Duality to appear, if it did not exist at all; bence
it must be admitted that this Duality is not destroyed, and
Ci^HiTiues to exist and form the substratum of the qualified cogmttQu; specially as the character of such substratum consists in
the fact of its appearing In the cognition. This is what is meant»
by—'na, ääütpatteh*—That is to say, it is not that Duality is
not destroyed at the time of the substance; but what happens is
that the cognition of the quality of Duality, and also the cognition
of the substance, are produced so close upon each other that
we are unable to notice any sequence between the two, and
hence we come to think that both Duality aud the substances to

264

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI.

which it belongs, form objects of one and the same cognition j
in reality however it is Dua];tv thnt is cognised first, and then
the substances.
The author cites a corroborative example : Yathd &c. In the
idea ' the Äkäca has sou ad in it/ there are three cognitions
coming one after the other,—(1) that of sound, (2) that of Akdga,
and (3) that of Äkäc,a being qualified by the sound ; and similar
is the case with the cognition of Duality &c. That is to say,
just asjn the case of the cognition of sound &c, in as much as
the cognitions follow closely upon one another, we are unable to
perceive any sequence in their appearance, and come to regard
them as simultaneous,—in the same manner we have in the case
of the cognitions of Duality and Substance.
Some people have urged that the appearance of the cognition of the substance is not possible in accordance with the.
theory of one cognition destroying auother ; and it is with regard
to this that the another raises the question : Badhyaghdtalcapzkshe &c. That is to say, the following argument nifty be
urged :T—"If Jbhe cognition of the substance do not appear OD the
"destruction of Duality, simultaneously with the cognition of
"the quality, then it could not be produced, in accordance with
"the theory of one cognition destroying another. Because just:\
"as the ApeksMbuddhi on appearing produces Duality, so also ^
"would it produce the Impression or Faculty, 'jSansJcdra; and i
"this latter is the destroyer of that Buddhi ; hence at the ap- I
"pearance of the Sanskdra and Duality, there is an appearance %
"of the cognition of the generality of ' Duality '; and also the \
"production of the idea of quality, and the destruction «f the
"Apeßshäbuddhi, and the destructiblity of Duality,—all tins
"constituting one point of time ; and^then at the next moment, 1
"we have the appearance of the^idea of quality and the destruc- |
"tion of Duality ; and in as much as thesel atter are at a distinct -I
"point of time, we could not have the cognition of 'two subatan- i
"cfis/ which depends upon the appearance and destruction; and j
"hence the objection applies also to the theory of the destruction |
"of one cognition by another"
|

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES

265

Rep/]/ : Na, samühajnänasya saüskäraMtutvät. That is
to say, what produces the sansicdm is tbe collective cognition of
the substance qualified by the quality of Duality, and not the
mere indeterminate or unqualified cognition, tbe Ap&Jcshäbuddhi:
&nd hence this latter is not destroyed by the eanskdra. The
fact of the Ape/cshäbuddhi not being the cause of tbe saaiekdra
improved by the remeu?'>AHce of the two unities as distinct
from the substances.
Objection; " When one cognition on appearing destroys
the previous cognition, then, in accordance with this view, we
must have the two existing together (in order for the one to be
able to destroy the other) • and this would be a contradiction
of the Süträ speaking of the ' non-simultaneity of cognitions/
The sense of this objection is further explained—'Syanwiatam
&c./ and then again by 'nanu etc/
Reply : Na <iL*c. That is to say, there is no incongruity in the
simultaneity of two such cognitions as are destructive of each
other. The 'uon-siinultaneity' spoken of in the sütra refers to
such cognitions as do not destroy each other,—two such cognitions cannot exist at one and the same time, That is to say,
what is meant to be denied by the mention of 'non-simultaneity'
is the simultaneous appearance of two cognitions, and also their
simultaneous existence without destroying each other. In accordance with the theory of one cognition destroying another,
however, there is no simultaneous appearance of any two cognitions; nor is there simultaneous existence of any two cognitions ;
as soon as one appears the other atonce assumes the destructible
form. This is what is meant by 'na hi &c/ The particle * iti *
indicates the end of the discussion.
(A fresh Discussion is started).
Objection : *• Weil Sir, all this description *of the process of
""the production &c. of Duality is wholly irrelevant; as there is
"no proof of the existence of Duality itself.
Question : "We have an evidence for it, in the shape of the
''cognition of two 'Substances.'
:
19
"

266

FRAQA8TAPADA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

]

"Answer: Not so ; because Duality is devoid of the mark %
"of coguisability. That is to say, auy object when cognised, be*
"comes so either as produced or aa not produced ; in any case %
"the cognisability could not belong to Duality; as when it is
"produced it does not exist and when it is p<H produced it can
"have no continuance.
1
Question: 'The object in the past is what is cognised, as it]
is such an object that brings about the cognition/
j
<%
Answer: Not so; because this explanation is not con"patrbie with the fact of all things being cognised as in the pre-t
"Sent; and also because if such were the case then the organs of
"sense (which are causes of the cognition) would also be cog«J
"niaable or perceptible (which is not admitted).
t
Page 123.] Question : 'It may be that the character of they
"thing is so modified by its cause and its accessories that eveöj
"though both the thing and the sense-organs are -equally the;
"cause of the cognition, yet it is only the object, and not thej
"sense-organ, that becomes the cognised. And as for the notion^
"of the cognised thing being in the present, that may be ^xpiain"ed as being due to the fact of the cognition appearing im-f
"mediately after the object,"
I
"Answer: What do you mean by this 'cognisability' 1
"It may be said that cognisability consists in being the cause
"of cognition.
f
"But in#that case the sense-organs also, being the causes of
"cognition, would have to be regarded as cognisable.
"Objection: 'The self-cognition-of the cognition would
constitute the cognisability of the other (u e. of the object cog-J
nised)/
I
'<Reply : It is very queer that the cognition should be o£
"one thing (cognition), and cognisability should belong to some»
thing else (the cognised object),
4
"Objection: 'There is nothing queer in this ; as surely you
"cannot object to the nature of things, A cognition by its verj:

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

267

''nature is so constituted as to comprehend an object; and hence
"it is the cognising of the cognition's own self that constitutes
"the comprehension of the object; and this comprehension is
i(
on\y ofthat object which has brought about the cognition, and
"of no other object; and as such there can be no irregularity.'
"Reply: Not so ; because of the singleness of the object.
"The meaning of the cognition being artkaja, is that it is produced from it; and certainly this production is one only. And
"because it is a property of the cognition and the object, that
"would be no reason why it could not restrict the object.
"It might be argued that, in as much as the cognition is a
"property of something else, it could not belong to the object.
"But, as a matter of fact, it is the mutual restriction or limitation of these that constitutes their relationship of the apprehen"der and the apprehended, and this relationship is not due to
"the restriction of only one of the two members related. Nor
"has the past or future object any causal potency towards the
"cognition, for the simple reason that they do not exist at the
"time.
"Question : 'Cannot the relationship of the object and the
"cognition of that object be the basis of the relationship of the
"Apprehender and the Apprehended V
"Answer : That could not be ; because of non-difference ;
"that is to say, the character of the apprehended does not in any
"way differ from that of being the object of the cognition, and
"that of the apprehender is not different from that of being the
"cognition of that object; and hence when we ask you the cause
"of the mutual limitation of these two, you name these very
"characters as the basis,—and certainly it passes beyond the
"limits of all answering intelligences«
"Question : I t is the very nature of cognition that it apprehends only certain definite things.'
"Answer: If this nature be not due to any cause then
"there can be no restriction of the object; and if it be due to

268

PBA<?A3TAPäDA BflÄSHYA.—CHAP. VL SECTION (10).

"some cause, then please tell me what this cause is; what -is the
"use of trumpettiug about the ^nature' of ehe thing ? And as a
"matter of fact, we cannot think of any other cause save the
"production or appearance»
"Objection: 'It is only that which brings about the cognition, and gives form to it, that can be apprehended by it, and
"nothing else. It is absolutely necessary to admit that in cognition the form is that of the object. Otherwise cognition, being
"of the nature of pure consciousness, without any form, could
"pertain equally to all things, and there could be no such specification as that this is the cognition of blue, and that the cogni"tion of yellow ; and then cognition would never afford any idea
"of particular things. It is for this reason that the form of the
"object is regarded as the evidence or authority of the cognition.
"And it is this form of the object which connects the cognition
''with a particular object. And as the sense-organs are common
"factors, they cannot lead to the specification of cognitipna,
"and as such caanofc be regarded as apprehended. To this
"effect it has been said that, in as much as it is the form of the
"cognised object that connects the cognition with ita object, and
"as it does not renounce that form of the object, it is thai form
"alone that constitutes the evidence or authority of the cognition |
"of that object; and then again, we have another declaration to
"the effect that, the mere being of the consciousness cannot be
"rightly regarded as cognition ; as that is a factor common to •!
"all cognitions ; and it is only that which would turn the cognl- i!
"tion into its own specific form that could impart its form to j
"that.
i
"To this the fbllowuig reply is made: What is it that is per*» f
"ceived by the cognition with a form ? Is it the object, or the .^
"form of the cognition itself, or both ? It could not be both; because |
"what is apprehended is in a single form, of the 'blue' for in9- I
lance. Nor is it right to assert that the object is cognised by I
"the cognition; because at the time of the existence of the -

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILABITUCS.

269

"object in its own pure form, the cognition does not appear;
"aad a$ the time o£ the cognition, the object having been relegated to the past, could never be apprehended as existing in
"the present. If it be asserted that the idea of the present that
"enter« into the cognition pertains to the moment of time con"comifcani with the time of the cognition,—this woaid be an
"instance of extreme credulity and faith in your own doctrines;
"as the moment of time ia never found to form the object of cogni"fcion. What too is the reason that a cognition brings about the
"apprehension of only a particular object, and not of all objects ?
"Tftere iß no identity between the object and the cognition ; nor
•could the appearance of the cognition be the means of the
"restriction,—as has already been shown above.
li

QbJ6ction : The cause of restriction would lie in the fact of
"the cognition having the form of that particular object/
"Reply: How is it that 0De moment (individual) of tne
"blue does not apprehend another blue (the blue form being
"the same in both cases) ?
"Objection: 'The apprehensive potency belongs to the cognition alone, and not to the object/
"Reply : Yet, any one cognition oibltte would apprehend all
"moments (individuals) of the blue; as the blue form would be
"common to ail.
"Even if it be argued that apprehensibility belongs only to
"that moment or condition of the object which brings about
"the cogoition, and which imparts its own form to it,—then
"in that case, apprehensibility would belong to the sense-organ,
"and also to the cognition appearing immediately before it;
"as these two also serve to bring about the cognition ; and the
"cognition also bears their respective similarities, in that it pertains to the apprehension of an object (thus resembling the
"sense-organ) and is of the nature of consciousness ( thus
"resembling the preceeding cognition).
"Objection: 'You say that the cognition resembles the senso-

270

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

"organ in that it pertains to the apprehension of objects, and also
"the preceediog cognition, in that it is of the nature of conscious"ness; but both these resemblances are common to all cognitions. What is peculiar to each cognition is only the similarity
"that it bears to the object cognised ; as the form of blue can
"be present only in that cognition which is produced by the Hue
"object And it is only that property which is peculiar to a thing
"that can serve as the restrictive agent. And it is on account
"of this that what the cognition particularly apprehends is the
"object, and not the sense-organs or the preceding cognition.'
"Reply: There is not much in this ; as there would always
"be a likelihood of the apprehension of such preceding cognition
"as may have the same object.
"Objection : * That blue object which imparts to the cognition the blue form, is what is apprehended by it; ^nd in the
•'case of a serial cognition, the blue form of the cognition is due,
"not to the blue form of the preceding cognition, but to the blue
"object; as it is only the object with whom the appearance of
"the blue form is found to be invariably concomitant—always
"existing when it exists, and never when it does not exist; and
"as for consciousness, it is found to have a power of bringing about
"a form of consciousness alone.'
"Reply: Whose commands have you received to the effect that
"what is apprehensible is only that which imparts the form, blue
"f. i., to the cognition ? If the apprehensible character ofthat
"same object were to be the means of such a restriction upon
"apprehensibility, then, the restriction might be taken as due
"to the peculiar nature of things only. As a matter of fact, it is
"found that when the cognition appears, it does so in the form
"of the cognizance of such an object as to which the auxiiliaries
"of the cognition appertain ; and the object also is cognised only
"in that particular form in which it is cognisable ; and the sense«
"organ &c, are not cognised. Consequently the form of the
"object need not be taken as the cause of the cognition. As
"certainly the relation of the action of cutting to the tree is not

QUALITIES; SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES,

271

"due to the fact of that action possessing the form of the tree
"(that is cut); nor is it through the axe; but the tact is that
"the nature of the action, and also that of the tree, is such that
"fche action is restricted to (pertains to) the tree only, and to
"nothing else. Then as for the restricted notion that this is
"the cognition ofthat, this is due to the character of the cogni*tion (appearance) itself; and for the sake of this too we need
"not look for any form.
"It might be urged that the object is not apprehended by
"the cognition which has a form,—the cognition apprehending
"only its own form. But, in that case, there would be absolutely
"no proof for the existence of the object, as there would be
"neither the apprehension nor the determination or (ascertainment) of the fact; what would be possible would be a mere
"fancy of it; and though this fancy is the effect of mere
"imagination, yet, in as much as it follows on the wake of sense"perceptiön, wherever we have sense-perception, there the fancy
"renounces its own function, and taking up the functions of the
•"cause it renders the thing in question perceptible ; but in a
"case where sense-perception itself is not present, the fancy also
"is wholly incapable; as the cause (of its functioning) is absent.
"Objection: 'The form of the cognition becomes a proot
"for the establishment of the object, by tending to restrict the
"operations of a cause similar to itself.'
"Reply: Then is it that there is, in the external world,
"something that imparts the gross form (to the cognition). I
"wonder what would be the fate of such an assertion !
"For these reasons, we conclude that the appearance of the
"gross form in the cognition is not due to the object; because
"any thing of this nature has been proved above to be absent
"in the case of one cognition (that of Duality); and it is equally
Impossible in the case of other cognitions."
"If this cognition (of the gross form of objects) were not
"due to an object, and were to be brought about at times by
"«onae cause or other, then, it would be conceived of either as.

272

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION 10.

"non-existing, or as having any other form than the one in
"which it is perceived ; or it might always be conceived of as
"non-existiug; as it is as good aa proved that it is not very easy
"to differentiate between the correct and mistaken forms of
"coguitions. Then again, at the time of cognising, the form of
"the cognition points to a similar object as its adequate and
"efficient cause, specially when it is understood that the form
"of the cause of a cognition is similar to that of the cognition
"itself. But this understanding is not possible when the object
"is not) what is cognised ; because any firm conviction, of one
"thing being similar to another and being its cause, depends
"upon the due cognition of both the things concerned. Hence
"we conclude that the existence of the object is not proved by
"the form of the cognition. For this reason too the fact of the
"object being the cause of the cognition cannot be accepted as
"constituting its apprehensibility; nor is the causal efficiency
"of the object capable of imparting its form to the object.
"Hence it is only right to assert that on account of any object
"not having the apprehensible character, there is nothing be"sides the cognition itself, which makes it conceivable«
j
"For the following reason also, there is no object apart
"from the cognition. The object being inanimate and non"intelligenfc, it could not manifest itself; nor can we find any
"other manifester for it ; as in all cases there is the same one;
"form of the object that is cognised. Even if there were any
"such manifester, unless that manifester itself were self-mani"fest it could not manifest the object. That which has its
"manifestation or appearance not manifest, cannot but be re- \
"garded as unmanifest, just as things behind a wall; and toil
"you the external object is such as has its appearance not ]
"manifest; and then too that which would be the manifesteri
"of another, must, like the lamp, be independent, for its own J
"manifestation, of anything else like itself; and as for cognition, |
"it is clearly the manifester of something else; and under the \
"circumstances it would be moat unreasonable to asssert that the

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

273

''self-manifest cognition has the object for its manifester. If such
"were the case, then on the ground of the two always being
"found together, as between the omniscient and non-omniscient,
"so between the cognised and the cogoiser also, there would be
"non-difference. Because wherever there is difference, there
"is no possibility of the two things being always found together;
"as for instance, we find that blue and yellow are never perceived simultaneously at one and the same place ; and the
"fact of two things being always found together is the very contradictory of their not being found together ; and thus on account of the presence of something concomitant with its contradictory, the certainty of difference becomes precluded
"and tends to prove the certainty of non-difference ; and thus *
'* is established the premiss of our argument.
"Objection : 'The word 'saha' (in 'sahopalambha') means
"either help or simultaneity: and as these are always concomitant with difference, tha above argument is self-contradictory/
"Raply : Not so ; because what wo have put forward as
«'the reason is not an assumed companionship; even in the
"stock example of the 'two moons/ there is no real companion"ship; as the moon is one only.
"Objection: 'The moment cognised by the omniscient
"person apprehends, along with itself, all living beings; and
"yet these latter are not non-different from the cognition of
"omniscience; and thus your argument becomes inconclusive/
/'Reply: Not so; because there is no such absolute neces- I
"sity as you imagine. Those things, whose companionship is with |
"reference to moments of time, for them there is such an absolute |
"necessity as you say; because the two moments are never again j
"perceived individually; bat this is not the companionship that |
"we mean; what we mean is with reference to the series; and cer- j
"tainly there is no companionship or coocomitance between the
" cseries'of the omniscient mind with that of an ordinary mind ; as
"for the former it is possible, at certain times, to rest within
20

:

'

274

PBAQASTAPÄDA BHÄßHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

"itself; and at these times also he does not cease to be omniscient;
"as the power remains in him ; e. gf the cook, even when he is ;
"not actually cooking, retains the character of the cook. Hence
"we conclude that what is known by a cognition does not differ
"from that cognition ; as for instance, the cognition's own self ;j
"and then we find that Blue &c. are known; if these were ]
"different from cognition, they could not be known by it; as the I
"non-difference, which ia the very necessary condition of suoh !
"cognisability, would be absent; the very appearance of the
"cognition not being the necessary condition ; and then too, if
"any one thing were to be cognised by something wholly
"different from it, and not bearing any relationship to it, then 5
"there would be a total disorder. And further, in as much as \
"in difference we cannot find the necessary condition, nor the^j
"all-pervading invariable relationship, this would preclude cog-|
"nisability from difference, and relegate it to its contradictory^
"non-difference \ and this establishes the premiss of out«
"argument.
%
"The above also proves the non-difference of the form of T ]
"(fche.cogniser), from cognition. As for the distinct notions thati
"we come to have of the cognised, the cogniser and the cogniS
"tion—these are only instances of misconceptions, like that off
"the ' double moon'; and the cause of this misconception, as ofl
"all misconceptions, lies in the väsand of the beginningless and]
"unceasing flow of non-difference. To this effect we have the.:
"declaration: In all unmistaken cognitions the notion of
"difference is Wee the notion of two moons,
"Objection : 'If there be no external object, then what would
"be the cause of the cognition appearing ia the form of the blue
"(£ i.)? It has been well said that the idea of the object is of.
"the form of the object; and the Idea has got that form as its"
"qualification ; and it deserves to be considered whether that
"cognition follows from the external world or from elsewhere/ f
"To this the following reply is made: Even if the external
"object exists, what would be the cause of the cognition in

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

275

"question ? The blue object could not be that cause ; because
"this object is not what is seen,—the object being always beyond
"the reach of the senses. It might be urged that from the
"effects we could deduce and assume the object (to be amenable
"to the action of the senses). But in that case why cannot you
«'assume a diversity of potencies in the preceding cognition it"self, which is quite perceptible 1 And this latter assumption
"would also explain the diversity of forms in Dream-cognition,
«which could not be attributed to the potency of objects belonging to different places and times, as none of these objects
"are extant at the time.
"Objection: 'Well, in that case, there could be no variegated
«cognition; as cognition being one only, all cognitions, being
«nondifferent from it, would be one only; and if there were
"distinct cognitions, each with a distinct form, then, in as much as
"each of the cognitions would be restricted to its own form, there
"would be no cognition apart form these, which would appre"hend ail the forms concerned.'
"To this we make the following reply: It is not that a
•'variegated form is never manifested ; as any such assertion
«would be contrary to a fact of direct cognition. It is well
"known that a non-intelligent thing cannot be manifested; hence
"this variegated form also must be of the nature of cognition
"alone (which being intelligent would be easily manifestible).
"Nor does the diversity of coguitions depend upon the diversity
"of forms; as in the variegated form, there is no diversity of
"forma; just as in the blue substance, the blue character is the
«only form, so also in the variegated object, the variegated is the
"only form. And this being of the nature of cognition, when
«the cognition would operate towards itself in that form, it
"would operate either in its entirety, or not at all; and it would
"never operate partially ; as the cognition has no parts. As for
"the parts that appear to us as distinct from one another, these
''do not constitute the 'variegated* form ; and hence there is no
"incongruity in our view of the case.

276

PBA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

"The gross form also may be explained in the same manner.
"There can be no single gross whole made up of a number of
•'subtile parts; as it would have to be regarded as many, on
"account of its inhering in each of the many constituent parts.
"As for the form of the cognition however, in as much as it
"exists in a single cognition, it couid very well be the one gross
"cognition. And as for the contradictory characteristics of
"trembling and non-trembling (as belonging to the gross object
"and the cognition respectively),—this some people are inclined
"to reject as contrary to real perception. While others hold
"that in as much as the form of the cognition appears only by
"the force of beginningless vasands, it transcends the limit of our
"thinking; and as such its essence must be regarded to lie in its'
"falsity. That is to say—that which is a cognition is not based
"upon something in the external world, like the cognitions in;
"dream—the waking cognition of the post is a cognition--(an<
"hence it could not be based upon any thing in the external
"world.) The Niralawbanata—i. e. the not being based uporj,
"an eternal object—is found, in the case of dreams, to pertaii
"to all cognitions; and the waking cognition also is a cognition]
"hence if ife were to renounce the character of not being bask
u
upcn external objects, then it would renounce its own ver
"nature.
"Objection: 'If all cognitions were to be devoid of subs
tratum in the external world, then the cognitions of the Majo
"term, the Middle term and the Instance of an inferential argu
ment would also be devoid of such a substratum; that would impl
the non-existence of these ; and then there could be no Inference
"and if these cognitions be accepted to have real substrata, the
"these would invalidate the reasou given for holding all cognt
"tions to be devoid of such substrata.'
"Reply: Not so; these cognitions also have no substrata i
"the external world; they come to help in the appearance of tl
"inference, through their samvriti (assumed) reality. We ofte
"find real knowledge following false things; for instance,

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

277

"bave the cognition of the real letter from the marks on pape
"(which marks are not the real letters).
"Objection: *But the marks forming the letter are quite
real in themselves/
"Reply: True, they are real; bub they are incapable of
giviog any meaning in the form of the marks; they afford mean"ings only when the character of letter-sounds ( which do not
"exist in them in reality) are imposed upon them ; and as such
"the usefulness of these marks lies in the unreal form thus im"posed, and not upon the real form (of the mere lines)/'
The above embodies in brief the Purvapahsha, in reply
whereto we have the following :—One of the arguments put forward by the opponent is based upon the absence in the object of
(he marks of apprehensibility. But this argument cannot
prove the non-existence of the object. It may be that the external object may not be apprehensible ; but that does not prove
that it does not exist; specially as non-apprehensibility or nonperception might be due to the form of the object being remote
(that is too far removed to be directly perceptible), as is the case
with ghosts.
Objection: "If a thing that is perceptible is not perceived,
that certainly proves that the thing does not exist/'
Reply: True ; but how have you ascertained the fact of the
external object being 'perceptible/ ? Its perception (according
to you) has never occurred : If it has occurred, then the marks
of perceptibility cannot be said to be absent from it. Then again,
the perception of a thing depends upon the percipient; and the
percipient cognition is limited to itself; so if this in itself is enough
to prove that all else is imperceptible,—and *he non-perception is
due to the absence of anything that could be perceived,-then your *
reason or premiss becomes the same as your conclusion.
Page 127] Then, again please explain this that you are asked—
What is the 'perceptibility' of the form of cognition ? It is not

278

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

tbe cause of the cognition, as the two are oon-different. Nor can
this perceptibility be regarded as consisting in the imparting of
the form to the cognition; as we do not perceive two forms in any
cognition. Nor can c perceptibility' be said to consist in the cognition itself; as in the state of deep sleep, though the nature of
the cognition continues, like the series of cognitions, yet it is not
perceived or apprehended.
Objection: u Perceptibility may consist in appearabUity
or manifestibility."
Reply : What do you mean by the 'appearance' of the form
of cognition ?
f
Objection : "It is the capability of rejection nr acceptance!
as following upon cognition/*
d
Reply: This capability is present In the external object alsol
For instance, by the cognitions cthis is blue/ 'this is yellow|
what one accepts, rejects or treats with indifference is the ex-1
ternal object, and not anything within himself. And thus it is note
proved that the object is devoid of the marks of perceptibility, 'i
Objection: "How can the production of one thing (cogni-J
tion) constitute the capability (of rejection or acceptance ) of;
another (the external object) 1 "
I
Reply : The peculiarities of the nature, the cause and thel
auxilliaries of the cognition produce, in the object, the character^
of being used in accordance with those (form &c.) ; and as such:
there is not much force in the objection.
.This same argument disposes of the arguments of the .
vapakshin in regard to 'cognisability'; as that too is produced]
by the peculiarities of the nature, cause and auxiliaries of
cognition; specially as this oognition serves the purpose of \
.eluding all doubts and contrary notions with regard to
objeeö.
Then, it has been argued that what is non-intelligent is
incapable of manifestation or appearance. But if this incapabi-

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

279

lity refer to such aa object as has not manifestation itself for its
very nature ;—theu the argument becomes redundant ( as no
one admits of the manifestation of such an object.) If however ife be meaat to refer to relationship and connection
then it cannot be proved ; because there is no royal command
to the effect that the non-intelligent can have -no relationship
with manifestation. Just as the action of cutting becomes related to the object that is cut, and is yet distinct from it—so
in the same manner, the action of cognising would be related
to the. cogni8edt and yet be distinct from it. Then, as for the
invariability of the concomitance of the cognition with the cognised (which the apponent brings forward as proving the identity of the cognition and the cognised), it cannot absolutely
prove the negation of the opposite conclusion (that is to say, that
concomitance does not prove that the object is non-existent);
as the simultaneity of the apprehension of the blue object and
the cognition of blue could" be possible even when cognisability
belonged to something besides itself.
Objection i "But there being no external object, the cognition can not be percipient of anything besides itself."
Reply: The preclusion of the conclusion opposite to yours
could follow only upon the establishment of the non-existence
of the external object; and the non-existence of the external
object again you seek to prove by the negation of the opposite
conclusion ; this involves a mutual inter-dependence.
Objection: "Even if there is this inter-dependence—what
ofthat?11
Reply: But as a matter of fact also, the invariability of j
concomitance between the cognised aud the cognition, is not i
established ; as whenever we have a cognition of the blue object, ,
what is cognised as 'blue' is perceived as something external,
while the cognition is perceived as something internal.
Objection : "The concomitance is proved by the self-apprehensibility of the cognition."

280

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (01)

^

Re-ply : What is the evidence for this self-apprehensibility ?|
Objection: "Whatever is manifested does not depend upon!
anything else, for its manifestation ; as we find in the case of,
the lamp/'
Reply: The function of the lamp consists in the removing
of the darkness from the place to which it is brought; and this
operation having been done by itself, it does not, for that pm>
pose, stand in need of another lamp ; but for its own perception
it does need the eye and other organs of the person who would
see or feel i t ; and thus your instance becomes totally devoid of
the character you seek, to prove by it.
If by 'manifestibility' you mean the character of cogniti
and from that you deduce its independence of all other things,then your premiss becomes asädhärana, 'individualised'
' specialised' (and cannot prove anything).
..
Then again, it has been urged by the PurvapaksKin that, tl
thing whose manifestation or appearance is not manifest, is itse]
unmanifest, e.g. a thing hidden under a cover. But the unmani
fest character of the hidden thing is not due to itself, but to it
negation or absence ; and as such.this instance does not proy
the required concomitance (of non-appearance and non-self-mani
festibility).
Another reason put forward is—'because it is cognitioi
(therefore it is devoid of eternal substratum, like dream-cogni
tion.y But there is not much in this argument either; as th
instance is not quite established; Dream-cognitions also hav
their substratum in assumed external substances, and do not
wholly within themselves; as during dreams what are cognL
are only such things as have been perceived during the waki
state, which^appear in consciousness on account of the impressioi
left by them upon the mind. If it were not so, then it could not
that only such things are dreamt of as have been seen or heard öl
or otherwise perceived before.
Pago 129 ] Then again, if the external object did not exists
what Is vi that is cognised as having a definite from—'this is

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES

281

Objection : 'It is the form of the cognition that is cognised."
Reply : Not so ; as what is cognised is something outside
the cognition. If the cognised were of the form of the cognition,
then the cognition would be in the form * 1 am blue' and not as
'this is blue.*
Objection : "As the form of every cognition ia distinct and
peculiar to itself, some cognitions are apprehended in the form
oi%* and others in that of 'this'."
Reply: But no particular cognition is formed to be appearing always in the form of T, as we have those pertaining to the
form of'blue' &c. (;vhich always appear as blue). Because that
which one person will perceive as T, another person will perceive
as 'you'.
Objection: "It is only when one cognises himself then the
cognition is in the form of 'I*."
Reply: Then, is there a cognition of c something else * also ?
(this the Pürvapakshi denies as all cognitions are only selfcognisable according to him).
Objection : (No; but) it often happens that one's own form
is, by mistake, cognised as 'something else'. "
Reply: When this difference is directly perceived, why do
not you accept it as real ?
Objection: "Well, the direct perception is a mistaken one,
as has been well said: ' after a cognition there appears a factor
existing outside the cognition ; and this idea of difference, with
regard to cognition which is one and identical, must be regarded
as mistaken/ "
How do you provefcfaie?
"The identity of the cognition is proved by means of Inference."
Reply : An inference could be possible only after the senseperception has been proved to be true and not false.—and the
_

-82

?EA<?ACT:_P5,DA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (io)

sense-perception you would prove to be mistaken, by means of Inference,—this would certainly be a case of queer inter-dependence.
We graut, for the sake of argument, that the distinction is mistaken; but how is it that it is cognised only at particular places
and at definite times ? There certainly is DO cause for restricting
the assumption or imposition to a particular time and place.
Objection: "The restriction of the assumption would be
due to the peculiarities of the väsanä (of the cogniser)."
Reply : This is not possible ; as there is no reason for restricting the operation of the väsanä to any particular time or
place. If however, there is an external object, then in whichsoever place that object would exist, at that place we would have
its perception; and to that place would pertain the väsanä
preceding that cognition. When there is no object however, then
to what would be due the restriction of the place ? Nor, without
a particular cause, is a particular eftect possible.
Objection: "As there would be no external object, the
diversity could belong to the v Jsan%s alone ; and this diversity is
due, as in the case of your 'object', to the diversity of the causes
of these väsanäs ; and this process is beginningless."
Reply: If the diversity of vlsanäs were something other
tjhan the form of the cognition, then what would be the difference
of one väsanä from another ? If however it be something other
than the cognition, then why should you be so perverse to the
existence of the object ( something distinct from the cognition)
and thereby upset the common notions of all men ? By what too
this form (of väsanäs) imposed outside ? By cognition ? Does
this exterior imposition consist in the apprehension in itself
of the formt Or is it something else ? If the former, then it
would.come to this that, that which is its right apprehension is
also the wrong apprehension ! As the apprehension of the form
as pertaining to the cognition would be right; while that pertaining to the outside would be wrong. If however, it were
something else, then there could be no sequence in the appearance

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND OüSStMILARITlRS.

283

of the two \ as th« cause, iu the shape of the cognition, would be
momentary (according to the PürvapaJcshi-Bauddha); nor could
one and the same thing, at one and the same time,.ho, perceived
as right and wrong;. And yet there is no other way save those
of sequence aad simultaneity, wherein existing, the cognitioa
could apprehend the form in itself and also impose it outside.
Then again, if the blue object were only in- the form, of the
cognition* then that cognition alone could apprehend it, of
which thi3 blue would be the form ; and it could not be perceived
hy another person. Asa matter of fact, however, we often find,
a single object freing perceived hy many persons, whenever all
these persons have their attention turned towards it. We
often find people saying c I have seen that which you have seen.'
From this we conclude that the object is not in the form of the
cognition*
Pi*g& 130-1 There are some extremists who deny even this idealistic form to the objects of perception, all of which they regard as
unreal. B*it for these people there could be no restriction as to
particular effects following only from particular causes, or that as
to definite purposes being served only by certain definite objects.
Because whea there is no object, there is nothing that would be
the cause of another, or everything would be the cause of everything; nor could there be any analogy, or want of analogy, in useful
poses to be served, because of the absence of any differences. This
has been well said by the revered teachers—'Those that are satispuvjied with imaginary sweets, and those that have tasted real
sweats that they have obtained^—would both have in their body
the same organic changes (if the sweets had no real existence)."
Objection: "The distinction in such cases would be due to
the differences of vdsanä"
Reply-, If the vdaamd were the cause of the particular purposes served in the world, then your theory differs from ours
only in name—what you call (väsana we call 'artha,' 'object.' If
the väsana be said to be oi th<2 nature of a cognition, then, in the

284

?KA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. Tl. SECTION (10).

absence of an object, any peculiarity in it would be without
cause, baseless; as the only factor of 'cognition* would be common
in all cased. And if you admit of peculiarities in the form of
cogoitions, as well aa in some other shape, then Athat would
amount to the admission of 'objects.'
Then too, in accordance with this theory, the cognition of
blue could not appear at certain times only, and not at all times;
as the series of moments capable of producing it would continue
always and everywhere. If they did not continue, then the
cognition would not be possible at any future time.
Objection : "The cognition not standing in need of anything
besides itself, and the fruition of the cause appearing only at
particular times, it would follow that the effect of these also
should appear only at particular times/'
Reply: The "fruition" of the cause is nothing else save
its tending towards the production of the effect; and this too
would depend only upon self-apprehension ; and as such it
could not appear only at certain times. As a matter of fact, a
direct perception is always such as appears only at certain times.
And this perception applies to the external object, which is
cognised as pertaining to definite points of place and time; and
hence it is this perception which sets aside all arguments brought
forward to prove the non-existence of that object. And thus
your premises become open to the fallacy of being ' kälätyayäpadishja.'
Thus has Number been explained.
Text (86).—Dimension is that which forms the basis of
all measurement It is of four kinds : (I) Minute,
(2) Large, (3) Long and (4) Short, (vii-i-8,17)
The Large again is of two kinds: eternal and
non-eternaL To the eternal kind belongs the
highest extensivenees of the Äkäca, Space, Tims

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES

9§5

and Self; while the non-eternal exists in the
Triad and the rest (vii-i-22, 24, 25, 16> The
Minute again is of two kinds—eternal and noneternal. The eternal is that in the Atom and in
the Mind; and this is what is known as
'Pärimändalya' (the atomic measure). The noneternal ia the Diad. (vii-i-ll, 13, 17^ Though
euch things as the Lotus, the myrobolan fruit,
the Bel and the like, are spoken of as minute and
large, yet the idea of minuteness can be applied
to these only'indirectly {or figuratively), being
based upon the existence in them of greater or
less dimension as compared with something else.
Longness and Shortness cohere with such Largecess and Minuteness as are caused* In the case
of such things as a piece of fuel, a &ugar-cane
and the bamboo, even though they are found to be
distinctly long, yet they are figuratively spoken of
as 'short,' in vievj of their greater or less length
as compared with that of something else, (vii-i9,10, 17;
Of the non-eternal Dimensions, all the four (the Long,
the Short, the Large and the Small) are caused by
(1) $ umber, (2) Dimension and (3) Aggregation.
(I) The plurality of number appears in tlie atoms and
the diads, according to the will of God; and when
these atoms and diads bring about the effects in
the shape of the triad and the like,, the said
plurality creates in these a certain length and
largeness, simultaneously with colour and the
other qualities. (2) In a case where the created
object is caused by two large components, as also
whs» ii is caused by many large components, the
of the object is due to largeness of the

286

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).
component parts, and not to their plurality ; as
even in a case where the }cumber of the components
in tivo objects is the same, we find a difference in
their magnitudes (if there happens to'be a
difference in tlte volumes of the components of
those objects). (3) As for Aggregation, we have
it in the case where two balls of cotton are
rolled into a single ball,—where what the Conglomeration produces in this single double ball, is,
not plurality and largeness, but largeness only,
by means either of conjunctions of the loose particles composing the halls of cottont or of the
mutual conjunction of the particles of one lall
with those of the other. We infer this from the fact
that even in a case xvhere the number, the largeness (or magnitude) and the dimension of the
components of two objects are the same, there is
yet a difference in the magnitudes of the objects
themselves (i. e. in two objects where the conglomeration of particles is loose and closely compact.)
It is the duality of two atoms which produces the minuteness
in the diad. In the triad, its length is produced*
just like its largeness, by means of the plurality, the
largeness and homogeneous conglomeration, of its
material cause (the component molecules). In
the Diad. shortness is produced, Just like its
tnintitenesSy through the duality of number.
Question : "What is the difference betiveen largeness and
length as belonging to triads, as also between
minuteness and shortness belonging- to diads ?"
Answer : There is a vast difference between the said
largenees and length; as is apparent from the
fact that we find people, saying with regard to a
large substance—"bring a loug thing (and not

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES,

287

this large one), and similarly, with regard to the
long thing—'bring the large thing ( and not this
long on«)'—where a clear distinction is made
betioeen the tioo. As for the difference bettveen
minuteness and shortness, it is clearly perceptible
to those (yogis ) ioho are capable of directly perceiving them (in the atom and the Diad, which
are not perceptible to the ordinary man).
All these four kinds of Dimension are caused ; and as
such, come to be destroyed on the destruction of
their substratum.
Commentary.
Page 133] The author now proceeds to describe Dimension
tarimänam &c.t 'Measurement' consists in the recognition of the
minuteness, largeness, length or shortness of a thing, and in
an expression of these qualities by words; the basis of this 'measurement' is what is called 'Dimension.' By this declaration the author
means to assert and prove, by showing its effect, the existence
of this quality, for one who would deny its existence. As we
have already shown above how an idea or cognition proves the
existence of what is coguised, which is its substratum.
Objection : " But how can the words (' anu ' &c.) prove the
existence of the quality; for certainly the word is not of the
nature of an object; if it were so, theu the uttering of the words
'food/ ' fire ' and 'sword,' would lead to the filling, burning and
cutting, respectively, of the mouth. Nor can the Word be said
to be born of an object; as it is a well known fact that words are
produced by the air within the body,striking against the throat
and other parts of the organ of speech. And certainly, that) which
is not of the nature of the object, nor is born of it, could never
be a Prdtipadika, the basic noun denoting a certain object;
if it could be so, it would lead to a deal of disorder."
Reply : The above reasoning is not right; if the word *sre
produced entirely by the inner air striking against the walls, of

288

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

the throat, then its utterance could not even prove the existence
of the desire to speak, on the part of the speaker; as it would
not originate from any such desire ; aud this would justify such
an assertion as that words do not indicate a desire to speak
on the part of the speaker—which would be like the incoherent
mumblings of a drunkard.
Objection : " The desire to speak may be regarded as the
remote cause of the word, operating through the striking of the
inner air ; and as such the word would point to the existence of
such a desire."
Reply : In the same manner would the word also indicate
the cognition of the object expressed by the word ; as a desire
to speak is always preceeded by a perception of the object
desired to be spoken of.
•
Objection : " In the case of a cheat we find that he has a ":
desire to speak of objects which he has never perceived."
Reply: We find that eveu though a man may not have
the desire to speak of a certain object, yet, through a mistake,
he gives utterance to words expressing that same object. Thi s .,
has been well described by the teachers thus: ' In the case of)
deluded or mistaken persons we find a word really expressive J
of one object being used with reference to a totally different f
object (and the concomitance of desire with utterance is as •
invariable as that of the utterance and the perception of the
object expressed)/
Objection: " It is not possible for words expressive of one
object being uttered through a desire to speak of a totally
different object. As if there were any such irregularity in the
concomitance of a thing with what has been universally re- J
cognised as its necessary aud invariable cause, then there would
be an utter irregularity and disorder in the whole world pro-1
cess. Hence even in the case of the mistaken person, even 1
though the desire, to speak of a certain thing ( of which he un- J
consciously speaks) may not be quite perceptible, yet it must be
admitted that it does appear quickly, in an indistinct form,

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

289

resembling the unfelt touch of a passing straw,—this fact being
assumed on the strength of the effects perceived."
Reply: Then in the case of the cheat also, we could assume
the perception of the object, on the strength of his desire to
apeak of it; as we find that unless a man has perceived an
object, he has no desire to speak of it.
Objection: ." But at the time that he is going to cheat, the
person has had no perception of the object."
Reply : That may be ; but it is possible that he may have
a remembrance of it; as all that the cheat does is to speak of
something that he has perceived before, as something else;
and hence his desire to speak of it is distinctly a product of its
recollection of it; and through that recollection, it may also
be said to be due to his previous perception of that object; and
as such there is no want of concomitance between perception
and desire to speak.
Even such desire to speak as is due to a wrong perception,
is indirectly the product of a correct perception ; and perception
Is always' concomitant with the object perceived ; hence the
existence and utterance of a word must be accepted as proving the
existence of the object expressed by it. If it were not so, when
a sentence would be heard, the hearer would not have any idea
of the objects spoken of thereby; and all that he would be
couscious of would be the desire to speak oa the part of the
speaker; and as this cognition would not serve any useful purpose, all verbal usage would become impossible. Nor would
there be any ground for deciding as to the victory or defeat of
disputants ; as the desire to speak would be equal in both» and
as such judged by that contention alone, both would be equally
right in their disquisitions.
Page 133 ] It has been declared by some that the Dimension is
nothing apart from the substance ; as so long as the substance
is not perceived we have no idea of the Dimension.
But this is not true; because *« often find that when a
substance is seen from a distance, its particular dimension is not
•

22

'

290

PRA£ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP VI. SECTION (10).

known ; and hence it ia that evea a large substance is mistaken
for a small one.
Dimension having been thus proved fco exist the author
now proceeds to describe its various kinds; Tat chaturvidkam &c.
He next points out the way in which it is of four kinds Anu &G.
The square or other shapes of things are due to the particular
arrangements of constituent molecules, and they do not constitute so many different kinds of Dimension.
Objection : " The same may be said of Length &c, also."
Reply : Not so ; because even when we do not perceive
the arrangement of the parts of an object at a great distance
from us, we do have distinct notions of its Length &c.
Objection : " Well Sir, the dimension of the Diad must be
minute; as tl?ere is no cause in it of the production of any
larger Dimension ; then again the Dimension of the atom must
be smaller than that of the Diad,—as the Dimension of the cause
is always found to be smaller than that of its effect; and hence
the Dimension of the atom must be totally different from that
of the Diad. Thus also the Dimension of the ÄMca reaching
up to the highest upward limit is wholly different from that
of the jar and other substances ; and then we have the long
and short Dimensions; and thus there are Six dimensions
(1 Minute atomic, 2 Minute Diadic, 3 Large ordinary, 4 Largest,
5 Long and 6 Short); why then should it be said of four kinds
only ?
In reply to this the author says : Tatra &c. That is to say,
from among these four Dimensions, the Large is of two kinds—
Eternal and Transient. The Eternal Large Dimension is that
found in Äkaca, Time, Space and Self; it is this that is called
' paramamahattva ; " " greatest largeness ;' and the Transient g
Large Dimension belongs to the Triad and other substances,
and not to ÄJcäga &c.
^
As the Large Dimension, so the Minute Dimension also is J
of two kinds—Eternal and Transient. In both cases the particle i
l
cha* is added with a view to deny the existence of any other i;

QUALITIES : SiatlLARITtES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

291

kind of Largeness or Minuteness. Tjbe eternal Minute Dimension belongs to the A.tom and the Miüds, as in these there are
no causes for either producing or destroying the Dimensions,
By ' Pdrimdndaly is meant the smallest dimension possible.
The transient Minute Dimension belongs to the Diad alone,
and to nothing else.
The sense of all this is that the Dimension of the atom is
only one form of the Minute Dimension, and the ' Largest
Dimension1 is only a form of the Large Dimension. If it were
not so then it would not be qualified by the word ' parama \
The word 'Afahat' 'Large' is applied to that Dimension which
helped by colour, renders its substratum perceptible ; and that
which is incapable of making its substratum perceptible is the
'Ann', 'Minute/ From this it does not follow that the Triad
also is Minute, because it is perceptible; its perceptibility
being inferred from the fact of its being made up of material
causes, like the jar; in fact it is that composite substance
which, though itself perceptible, has its constituent particles
such as are not perceptible. As for the Dimension of the
Äkägä, even though it is not perceptible, yet it is 'Large*; because its extension is larger than that of the Dimension of the
Diad (which is the outermost limit of the Minute),—like that
of the jar.
Page 1 3 4 ] Objection: "It has been said above that the transient
Minute Dimension belongs to the Diad alone: but this is not
quite correct, as we find the lotus, the ämalaka and the Bel
apokea oT in terms denoting that one is minuter than the other
(which would show that the minute Dimension belongs to these
substances also)."
To this the author replies—In the lotus &c.—That is to
say, the use of the word 'minute* with regard to the Ämalaka
must be regarded as secondary, or figurative, being based upon
the fact of absence in the Lotus of the Largeness of the Bel.
The word 'bhaktd ts derived from 'bhakti', 'division* i. en the
'possession of something as common between two thiugs; * hence,

292

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

* Similarity ;' and that wbich is due to, or based upon mere similarity, ig 'bhäkta' or * secondary/ Similarly the absence of the
largeness of the Amalaka in the Lotus, leads to this latter being
spoken of as 'minute*—this minuteness thus being only comparative. Absolute minuteness (transient) however exists in the
Diad alone; and in this, therefore, is a total absence of Largeness. The largeness existing in the Bel is absent in the
Ämalaka, and hence the application of the word 'minute' to this
latter is also only indirect or figurative.
The author next proceeds to show the peculiarities Length
and Shortness: Dwghahrasvatve <&c. These two qualities inhere respectively in the same substances as the produced (noneternal) Largeness and Minuteness. That is to say, in a
substance where the Largeness is produced, as in the Triad, the
Length is also produced; and in a substance wherein Minuteness
is produced, we have shortness also produced. Some people
say that the atom being a parimandata, it has no Shortness;
and that Äkäca being all-pervading, n has no Length; others
hold that like the usage of 'Extreme Atom* and 'Greatest Largeness', we also fiad the usage of 'extreme shortness* and 'extreme
length', and hence it must be<admitted that the former belongs
to the Atom, and the latter to Äkä$a ;—the argument being
stated thus: Akdca is the substratum of Length, because it is
the substratum of Largeness, like the pillar &c.; and again, the
Atom is the substratum of shortness, because it is the substratum of the minuteness, like the Diad.
Question: " If shortness is co-substrate with produced
minuteness, then how is it that we have the quality spoken of
as residing in other things V9
A n*wer: Saonit &c. That is to say, though in reality,
all such things as the piece of fuel, sugarcane and bamboo &c.
are in reality possessed of Length, yet they are spoken of as
'short', the epithet being applied to them secondarily, on account
of the absence, in the sugarcane, of the lengthy dimension
possessed by the bamboo, and so forth; and so also with the
piece of wood as compared to the sugarcane. It is only the Diad

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

293

that is absolutely short; as therein Length is wholly absent;
and hence the sugarcane comes to be spoken of as 'short', on
account of the absence in it of the length of the, bamboo.
Objection : " Why should not the application of the epithet
'short' to these substances be regarded as direct and true ?"
It is not so regarded, for the simple reason that that same
thing is found to be possessed of Length as compared with
something else; and certainly one and the same thing could
not in reality, be both long and short.
Objection : " In that case we might regard the epithet 'long'
as applied secondarily, and that of 'short' as real."
Reply: We do not find any cause for the production of
the usage of 'long/
Objection: " Then why should not we regard all usage
of 'short* as indirect and unreal ? '*
Reply: Not so; When the principal or direct thing is
possible there can be no possibility of the secondary or indirect.
The author now proceeds to show the cause of that Dimension which is produced, not eternal: A nityam &c. The four
kinds of transient Dimension, viz., Long. Short, Large and
Miuute—originates from the aggregations of Numbers and
Dimensions. He proceeds to explain how they are produced
from aggregations of number. The Diad is produced by two
atoms; being called ' two atoms ; 'and when three of these Diads
combine, the number ' three/ made up of the unities inhering in
each of the Diads, is produced in them through the intervention
of the Diviae will; and this number (' three *) produces, in the
Triad, which is a product of three Diads, Largeness and Length,
simultaneously with the production of its Colour &c. The word
* iti' is aded wihh a view to preclude the cause of the Large
Dimension ; and the word ' ädi' in ' Tryanukädi ' is meaut to
include the Quarternary and other products.
Page 1S5-] Question: How do you know that the Dimension of
the Triad &c, has for its immaterial cause, the plurality of
number inhering in the compooent Diads ?"

294;

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

**

Answer : By seeing that ho other cause is possible. Fori
instance, the said dimension could not be brought about by such .1
qualities of the Diads as Colour, Taste, Odour, Singularity^
Separateness, Gravity, Fluidity and Viscidity ; as all these when-!
ever productive are found to be productive only of like proper-"
ties; and hence if the minute dimeusion of the Diads was tai
produce the Dimension in the Triad, then the Dimension of a
this latter also would be minute only and not large ; as a-:
Dimension always produces its own like. As a matter of fact J
however, we find that the Triad is endowed with largeness m
as is evinced by the fact of its being composed of many compc-|
nent particles like the jar. Nor could any effect be produced!
without an adequate immaterial cause; and we have owued elsewhere that when two products are made up of parts of equal
dimensions, if the number of such parts be different in the two,
that difference makes a difference in the dimensions of the products ; and it is for this reason that in the case in question we
regard Number to be the required cause.
We might have regarded the conjunctions of the Diad to
be the cause of the Largeness of the Triad ; but then too, all
that we could say, would be that the conjunction of many component particles is the cause; and thus by distinguishing
ths known (prdpta) from the unknown, we would arrive at the!
same conclusion,—that it is manyness or multiplicity that is
the cause of the Dimension.
|
'
'
"4
Then again, that number Three which is dependent nponj
the will of God, could be destroyed, only at the destruction of the
unseen potency that holds it intact; and its destruction could not;
be due to the destruction of its substratum ; as the will of God
(which is its substratum) is eternal.
The author next proceeds to explain how Largeness is pro-?
dnctd out of Largeness: Dvibahubhih &c. In a product produced our of two and many component particles, the Largeness
is produced by the largenesses of the component«. Thus then, iii
a case where the product is made up of two icvrge particles not
combining into a single aggregate (but merely combining to-

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

29£

gether), the production of the largeness of thatrproduct is by the
largenesses of these two component particles ; as in this case we
have neither plurality of Number nor an Aggregation. In cases
however where the product is made up of many component particles, the largeness of the product is due to the largenesses of these
particles, and not to the plurality of Number. In a case where
made up of an equal number of particles, but the particles in
tbem are minute while those in the other large,—we find a
distinct difference in the Dimensions of the two things, and
this would not be possible if the Dimensions were due solely
to number; as the number of particles in both is exactly the same.
But in a case where two things are made up of particles of the
same Dimensions, but the number of particles in one is larger
than that in the other, and hence there is a distinct difference
in their dimensions,—in such cases Number must also be regarded as a cause of Dimension; otherwise the difference would
be inapplicable in the case in question. In a case where the
products are made up of an equal Number of particles, of the
same size, the production of Largeness must be taken as due to
both Number and Dimension, as each of these singly has been
found to have the power of pioducing Largeness ; and in this
latter,case we do not perceive any difference in the powers of
the two, both being found to be equally capable of producing
the largeness. This is the explanation offered by some people;
others hold that Dimension alone is the cause; as long as we
can find an homogeneous cause for an effect, it is not right'to accept a heterogeneous cause.
Page 1 3 6 ] The author next proceeds to explain Aggregation :
* Prachaya' or ' Aggregation ' is a peculiar kind of loose conjunction or combination, giving rise to particular products.
When two lumps of cotton go to make up a single Double
Lump, it is an aggregation that is present; it Stands in weed
of productive conjunctions or contacts in both of the original
lumps, or of the mutual intercontacts among the component
particles of both those lumps; and by means of these the said
aggregation produces the largeness in the Double Lump. In a
case where the contact of the two lumps is itself loose, and

296

PRACASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).
f
.
.
.
4
the contacts of their respective component particles are also•'•'%
loose, then, on the two lumps producing a product, we find a t
dimension greater than that of the substance that might be
produced by the firm contacts of the two lumps with their com
ponent particles also in ciose adhesion ; and in this case the
cause of the largeness produced lies in the loose contact of the^j
two lumps as depending upon the loose combination of thel
componeot particles ofthose lumps. In a case however where;'
the contact of the two lumps is loose, and the mutual contacts i
of the component particles are also loose,—but the constituents
of the lumps are not loose,—then> in that case, in the substance
produced out. of these two lumps, we fiud a largeness greater
than that the substance produced by a firm contact of the twoi
lumps which too have their component particles in close adhesion ; and this leads us to conclude that in such cases the
cause of tbe largeness lies in the loose contact of the lumps
depending upon the mutual contacts of the component particles
of both.
Question: " How is it that in the instances just cited you j
do not accept the Largeness to be due to Plurality and Large-j
ness, which have been proved above to have the power of pro-1
ducing it ? "
Answer: It cannot le due to any Pluralities or Large*
nessess. That is to say, in a case where the cognition of a
particular dimension is recognised as being due to Aggregation,
we cannot regard Plurality and Largeness as the cause—and the
reason for this lies in the fact of there being a difference of dimensions in two things made up of equal numbers of component parti- J
cles of equal dimensions and weights. If Number were the only J
cause, then there would be no difference between two things,
both of which are made up of equal number of component par- I
tides, even though the compact of particles in one were looser
than that in the other (but as a matter of fact this latter circumstance is found to make a difference;, as the number in both
would be exactly the same. Similarly if Largeness were the

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

297

sole cause, then there would be no difference between two
things made up of equally large particles, even though, these latter
were more compact than those in the other. As a matter of
fact however, in both these cases, we do rind a difference; and
from that we conclude that in such cases neither Number nor
Largeness is the cause.
In certain cases we find that one thing is made up of nonaggregated miaute particles, and another is made upof aggregated large particles; and the cause of the difference in the largeness or hulk of these two must be regarded as due to both Largeness and Aggregation. Then again, in a case where one thiug is
made of certain aggregated particles, aud another is made of
large number of equally large particles but non-aggregated, we
find an excess of bulk in that produced out of a large number
of aggregated particles ; and the cause of this is Number, as well
as Aggregation. Ina case where one thiug is made up of a
lesser number of non-aggregated minute particles, and the other
of a large number of aggregated bulky particles, the differeuce
in bulk must be attributed to all the three causes—Number,
Largeness and Aggregation.
Page 137] Some people think that in the case of substances capable of being weighed by means of a balance, the production of the
bulk in the product is due to the weight-measures inhering in
the cause, and not to the Large Dimension. And it is in view
of this theory that the author has denied the causal potency
of this height-measure', in the case of aggregated products.
Properly speaking, in accordance with the author's view, no such
causal potency ever belongs to weight measures.
It is the number 'Duality' iuhering in the two atoms that
produces 'minuteness' in the Diad. Some people hold that the
Dimension of the Diad is produced by the Dimensions of the
component atoms. But if such were the case then the Diad too
would be as 'minute' or 'atomic' as the atom itself,—an argument
we had brought forward before and which we repeat in the present connection. There is yet another reason, based upon the
fact of the unproductive character of the Dimension of an eternal
23

"—

298

PRAQASTAPADA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

substance. That is to say, the Dimension of the atom cannot be
productive of anything,—because it is the dimension of an
eternal substance, like the dimension of Akfu;a,—or, because it
is a minute dimension, like the dimension of Mind.
The author proves the production of Length—Mahattvavat
i. e. Just as Largeness or Bulk is produced by the plurality of
component particles, from the homogeneous bulk of the cause, and
by Aggregation,—so also is Length, which in ail these points is
similar to Bulk.
;
Anutvavat &c. That is to say, the shortness of the Diad
also has got the number 'Duality' for its non-material cause.
Question : " How is it that from a single cause there come
about diverse effects ? "
Answer : It is due to the difference in the unseen potencies
which are auxilliary to all causal operations.
j]
An objection is raised, based upon the conception that
Length is only a particular kind of Bulk or Largeness, and m
too is shortness a mere form of Minuteness.
\\
The reply given to this is—Taträsti &c. If there were BO;
difference between Length &nd Largeness, then we could have
no such specification with regard to a iong' thing, as that 'being
a large long thing;' as we do not specify a coloured substance as,:
'coloured*. As a matter of fact however, we do have suchl
specification with regard to long things; and hence the two!
cannot but be regarded as distinct.
J
Objection: "The dimension of a substance pervades all!
over it; and hence it would not be possible for one and the!
same substance to have two dimensions {largeness and length)."i
•1
Reply: There is no incongruity in such existence of two
unlike dimensions.
J
Objection: f* But even though the sub-class 'blue' differs
from the sub-class 'yellow/ yet we do not find these two inhering
in the same substance/'

QUALITIES ; SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

299

Meply: Those qualities whose co-existence we have never
seen, may be regarded as never co-existing; but in the case of
1
Largeness' and 'Length* all men are conscious of their coexistence, which, for this very reason cannot be denied.
Then as for the Minuteness and Shortness of diads, these
are directly perceptible to the yogis. In the case of our own
perceptions, we are able to perceive the difference between what
we indirectly or secondarily speak of as 'Minute' and * Short'; and
from this we conclude that these must differ in the primary
usage also.
All these four kinds of Dimension are destroyed only by
the destruction of their substratum, and by nothing else. The
word 'utpadyo! 'producible' in the text is meant to exclude the
minutest atom, the extreme short, the extreme long, , and the
extreme large.
Objection : "As a.matter of fact, Minuteness and Largeness,
and Length and Shortness, are brought about relatively to
each other (i.e. they are only relative qualities); and they have
no absolute reality."
Reply: As a matter of fact we find that the Dimension of
an object is measured by various such measures as the cubit and
the like, even when taken by itself, and also when taken in
comparison with the dimension of another object; and we do
not perceive any difference ia the two cases ; and if it were only
relative, there could be no idea of Dimension in the previous
case. Then the use of comparison lies in this that, when two
dimensions are cognised on that cognition of their substrate, tuen
alone can it be ascertained whether one is greater or less than
the other, which could not be done until the two were brought
together and compared.
Page 138] Text (87). Isolationis the basis of all notions of
separateness. It inheres in one as well as in
many substances. Its eternal and non-eternal
manifestations are in the same way as those of
Number; the only difference lies in this : that of

I 300

PRA(?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).
Isolation, there are no such subdivisions as
*Individual Isolation1 and the like, as there is in
the case of * unity' &c. (of number) ; bat Isolation
is alivays quilified by number; as we often come
across notions of Isolation qualified by number.
(vii-ii-2).

Commentary.
Isolation or separateness is the cause or basis of ail such idea
and expression as ' this is separate from that.' It; cannot be ,
rightly urged that this usage based upon mutual negation only
—Because that which is of the nature of pure negation cannot
form the subject of affirmation as well as denial.
i
This Isolatiou pertains to oue as well as to many subs- *
tances. The word 'pwnati implies that Isolation, which belongs ]
to one as well as many substances, is distinct from parim/ma i
which exists in one substance only. That is to,, say, while i
Parimäna, (Dimension) belongs to a single substance, single
Isolation belongs to one as well as to m.-iny substances.
The eternality, non-eteniality <\nd production of this should •
be taken to be the same as those with regard to Number. That j
is to say, the number 'oue' is eternal when belonging to atoms,|
and transient or non-eternal when iu products, in which case it j
is brought about by a cause, and is destroyed by the destruction?
of its substratum ; and similar is the case with single Isolation*;
belonging to a single substance ; and in the same manner, just;
as the numbers 'two* &c. belonging to many substances are"
produced by the apekshdbudclhi based upon many qualities, oa
the destruction whereof again they also are destroyed, as also
on the destruction of their substrata.—so also the dn»l Isolation
&c. inhering in many substances &c.
The affix 'tva in 'nittfänityatva is to be taken along with both
'nitya* and 'anitya', as it appears at the end of the Dvandva'
compound. In this seutence also tha particle 'tu* is meant to
indicate a distinction or peculiarity,—the sense being that it is
the eternality <&c. of this Isolation, and not those of
that is to he taken as analogous to those of Number.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

301

Having thus pointed out the similarity of Isolation with
Number, the author proceeds to show the points of difference
between uhese two.—Etdvän &c. Isolation differs from number
in the following point IQ the' case of Number we have the
sub-classes 'one', 'two', &c. under the one general class of
'number*; but in the case of Isolation we have no 3 ch sub-class
as 'single Isolation' under the general class of 'Isolation',
Question: "How is it then, that there are intermediate
class-notions with regard to the ' single Isolations ' belonging to
many substances ? "
Answer : 'Thi3 one is separate' 'these two are separate',—
in all these cases when separateness or Isolation is spoken of, it
is always spoken of as qualified by Number. The Isolation
inhering in a single substance is qualified by the number 'one';
and it is a peculiar form of this number which appears to be
spoken of as a 'sub-class'; and as for the comprehensive notion of
'Isolation', it is due to the class or generality of 'Isolation', and
not to any sub-classes of it.
In the'same manner we should also deny any such generality
or class as 'atom\ inhering in all atoms ; as also universal usage
may be explained as based upon the generality 'anu' as qualified by the epithet lparama\
Question : "Why do you not admit that a single Isolation
exists in all substances, and that the diversity of notions is due
to the qualifying number, 'one', 'two' &c. 1"
Answer: We do not admit this for the simple reason
that in the case of substances produced one after the other, we
do not perceive any inherence of qualities, as we do that of the
Generalities. Nor could it be a Generality or Class itself; as
until ideas of other substances are present, there is no notion of
Isolation, just as there is none of any Generality.
Text (88). Conjunction forms the basis of the idea of
two things being 'joined together.* It is the cause
of Substances, Qualities and Actions. In the pro-

302

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).
during of Substances, itfvnetions independently;
as is declared in the Sütra.—' Säpekshebhyo
nirapeksbebhyagcha'. In the'producingof Qualities
and Actions however it is dependent upon other
things ; as declared in the sütra—'Samyuktasa—
mavä)'ät agnervai9eshikam> (X—ii—5 to 7 ; I—i
-27, 29, V—i—-1 to 6, 10, 14. 17, ^—ii—1,
5, 6, 8, 15).
Question: What is the nature of Conjunction, and how
many kinds of it are there ?
Answer : Conjunction consists in the coming together of
two things that were lying apart from one another.
It is of three kinds: (1) Brought about by the
action of one of the two things coming together;
(2) brought about by the action of both, and (3)
brought about by another Conjunction. That
of the first kind is possible only in the case
of an active object coming in contact with an
inactive one; f. i. the contact of the pole with the
kite alighting upon it; and that of material
objects with the omnipresent substances, A a an
instance of Conjunction of the second kind we
have the collision of two things moving in opposite
directions and with contrary actions—f. i. the
coming together of two wrestlers, or of two fighting
rams. Conjunction of the third kind we find
in the case of an object that has just been produced, or that which has been in existence for a
long time, coming in contact with its immaterial
causes, which latter are in contact with the
material cause,—this Conjunction being that of
the effect with the cause, preceded ( and brought
about) by the Conjunction of the material and
immaterial causes. This Conjunction proceeds
from one or two or many Conjunctions. As an
instance of one born of one Conjunction, we have
the Conjunction of the double thread with the

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

303

vlrana, brought about by that of the single thread
ivith the vitaoa. The. Conjunction born of two
Conjunctions is that of the double thread with
Äkäya, produced by the two Conjunctions of the
threads to Uli the Äkä9a. As the Conjunction born
of many Conjunctions is that of the cloth with the
T\iny produced by the Conjunctions of the several
threads with the Turl. A single Conjunction
also, in certain cases, gives rise to two Conjunctions ; c g. ivhen there is a contact of the
atom of earth with that of zvater, and there
comes about a contact of that earth-atom with
another earth-atom, and also of that water-atom
with another water-atom, then these two Conjunctions simultaneously bring about two diads—one
of earth and another of icater ; and then, at the
time that there appear, in the two diads, tJteir respective Colour <£c, in accordance with those residing in their cause, there appear, simultaneously,
the two Conjunctions inhering in the cause and
effect, from out of tlie mutual Conjunction of their
material and immaterial causes. (VII—ii—9.)
Question : " What is the reason for all this I "
Answer : Even with that which is not a cause, if it happen
to be in contact with the cause, the effect becomes
connected,—such is the law; And it is for this
reason that the Earth-Diad becomes connected
with tlie Aqueous Diad in contact with the cause
of the former,—and so also does the Aqueous diad
become connected with the Earth-diad.
Question : "The two diad^ being connected with the each
other's cause and non-cause, how do tliey come to
be related to each other ? n
Answer: Their relationship is due to the Contacts produced by Contacts. Tl\ere is no Contact or Con-

304

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).
junction that is not born of a cause ; as no such
eternal unborn thing as Conjtinction has been
separately postulated, like the. pariroandala That
is to say, having spoken of the four kinds of
Dimension as 'produced1, the author has added—
' the parimatjdala is eternal'; and so if he had
meant the same in regard to Conjunction, he must
have spoken of as 'produced by the action of one
or other of the things in contact'; and then he
should have mentioned the * eternal' Conjunction
separately. This however he has not done ; and
hence vje conclude that there is no unborn, eternal,
Con junction.
The Conjunction of atoms ivith Äkä^a <£c. exists only in
one portion of those latter, and is brought about
by the action of one or the other.
There is no mutual Conjunction among all-pervading
things themselves; as they have no separate
existence (apart from one another). 'Separate
existence' consists in one or both members having
separate motion or distinct receptacle.
The destruction of all conjunction is brought about by
Disjunction inhering in one of the members: and
sometimes also by the destruction of the substratum.
Question : "How I "
Answer: When two threads arc in contact with each other,
if a certain action appear in any one part of
either thread, this action disjoins that part from
the other part of the thread, this disjunction
destroys the contact (of the thread particles) tfyat
went to make up the thread ; the destruction of this
Conjunction destroys the thread ; and the destruc*
tion of the thread brings about the destruction of
the contact of the two threads, which inhered in
the thread destroyed.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

3Q5

Commentary*
The autbor proceeds to prove the existence of Conjunct
tion—Samyogak &c. Ordinary men have such a notion as
' this is joined to that'; this notion cannot be based upon any
such quality as Colour and the like; as the notions of these
latter are wholly different from the one in question ; hence that
which is the basis of this notion cannot be any thing else but
Conjunction.
Objection: u The notion may be due to absence of intervening apace between the two objects concerned."
Reply:—What do you mean by this * absence of intervening space * ? Do you mean close contact, or the absence of any
eeparatenessl If the former,, then what you say is nothing
different from our view ; as it is only this close contact which
we call'Conjunction/ If the latter, then you should explain
what else besides Conjunction is there that could eliminate
the separateness of two separate things.
Objection: l§ That which for you is the cause the Conjunction of Don-conjunct substances, will, for us, be the cause of the
absence of the separaten sss of separate substauces."
Beply : It may be as you wish ; but this * cause' of yours—
does it transport its substratum to another place, and then
eliminates the separateness, or does it do this without transporting the substratum? In the latter case, the absence of
separaiene88 would be hardly obtainable; as the object would
be stationery in its former position (and as such the separateness would remain constant). If however the substratum be
held to be transported to another position, then what besides
that very cause, is Conjunction, that you seek to deny ?
Page 142] Objection: u We talk of Conjunction only in a case
where a substance is produced in a place not separate from another substance."

306

PRA<?ASTA?ÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

Reply: It is not the mere production of an object that
we speak of as * Conjunction'; but the word is applied to the
close contact or nonseparate existence of two such substances as
have been produced.
This conjunction is the cause of Substances, Qualities and
Action. For instance, the contact of threads is the cause of the
Cloth, a dubstance; the contact of the Soul and the Mind is the
cause of Buddhi and other such qualities; similarly the contact
of the drum and Äkäia is the cause of Sound, a quality;
the contact of the hand and the exerting Soul is the cause oi
Actions; and the coutact of Air with velocity is the cause
of the action (motion) of the tuft of grass; and so forth.
The author next proceeds to show in what manner Con->
junction produces Substances, and Qualities and Actions—
Dravyärambhe <&c. What is meant by its 'functioning indepen«J
dently' is that, in the producing of substances, Conjunction
does not stand in need of anything else save its own substratum, and efficient cause; and it does not mean that it does not
stand in need of a subsequently appearing cause; as if it were
so, then we would have no* possibility of the independent (with«
out any other cause) operation towards the production of properties born of 'cooking* (baking), of the final contact of the fire
and the atom, appearing after the destruction of the dark colour
of the (unbaked jar).
Question: a How do you know that in the producing of
substances, Conjunction functions independently ?"
Reply: Tathd bhavati &c. In the Sutra we have the
words ' TathdbhavatUi sdpekshebhyo nirapekskebhyaccha'—
occurring after the author has explained that we have an idea
that* the Cloth will be produced from out of the threads which
will be aided in their operation towards the accomplishment of
the cloth. The sense of this is that, just as we have the notion
* Thermding noted in th« foot-not« Udtdd«dly prefertbis ; that gfoain
th« Wxt gfr«« BO tense.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

307

that the Cloth will be produced out of the threads as aided, so
also have we the notion that it is produced out of threads
that are dependent aüd independent. If this were not the
sense of the Sütra the present tense used would not be possible ; that is to say, when some of the threads would be in
contact, and others would be still far apart, then we would
have the notion the 'cloth is produced* (which is an absurdity).
The sense of all this is that, in the Sütra in question, the
threads are spoken of as the cause of the notion with regard to
the present (in connection with the production of the Cloth);
and the word c independent' is used with regard to sucb threads
as are in mutual contact; which shows that in the production of
substances, Conjunction is independent of all else ; .but in the
production of Qualities it is dependent upon other aids—this
difference between the two processes is indicated by the particle
*tu:
Question: " How do you make this out " *
Answer: Samyuktasamaväyät—The words ' Agnervaiieshikam' (in the Sütra) refers to the heat of fire ; and when
this inheres in the fire that is in contact with the atom of
earth, it becomes the cause of the production of Colour «fee. ;
and this declaration in the Sütra therefore may be taken as
showing that, in the production of the Qualities (of Colour &c.)
the contact of the fire and the Atom stands in need of the
heat of fire. For if it were not so, theu the touch of fire couki
not be spoken of as a cause of the production of Colour, which
is found to be produced by theCmjunction of fire. In the
production of Buddhi, the Conjunction of the Soul and the
Mind requires the aid of Dharma &c, even though these latter
are totally different from its substratum and its efficient
cause. Similarly too, as a case of the production of Action, we
find the action of the tuft of grass produced by the Conjunotion (of wind).
Page 148.] Objection: ° As a matter of fact, we find that the

308

PRAC?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

sprout is produced after the destruction of the seed, and the jar
is produced after the destruction of the lump of clay; and from
this we infer that substances are produced out of Negations,
and not out of Conjunctions."
Reply: This 13 not right; as substances are distinctly
found to be produced out of particular Conjunctions and combinations of the particles that enter into their constitution. And
as Negation would be equally applicable to all things there
could be uo restriction upon the production of particular things
only at definite times.
A discussion is here started as to whether it is only a
previously existing entity that is produced ly causes, or it iff
something that did not exist before, which is produced.
The Sankhyas hold the following view (Sänkhya-Kärika
9):—" It is a previously existing thing that is produced by causes.
" (1) Because of the non-production of the non-ezisUnt; That
"is to say, that which does not exist, for instance the 'sky" flower/cannot be brought into existence by any means; on the
"other hand, it is quite natural that that which is already an
" entity should be brought into existence ; as ' existence' cons" titutes its very nature. In ordinary experience we find that
w
when thej seasamum seed is pressed, what is produced is the
" oil that already existed in the seeds. We have no instance
" of a nonentity being produced.
" (2) Because of the causes. That is to say we find definite
" causes taken up by, and related to, definite effects ; and this
" shows that the effects are entities ; as otherwise they could not
" have any such fixed relationship. Nor can it be rightly held
" that it is an unconnected effect that is brought by an unrelated
cause. As it is not possible for all this to be produced. That
" is to flay, absence of relation would pertain to all effects
" and causes equally, and hence all*effects would come out of

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

309

" ail causes ; as a matter of faci» however, this is not the case ;
" hence it must be admitted that prior to its production the effect
4<
existed and bore a definite relationship to its cause. This
"is what has been declared in the following verse: * Causes
"connected with entities have no connection with non-entities;
"one who would hold the production of unrelated effects would
* have no resting ground.1
"(3) Then again, does causal afificiency belong to that
x " which has the necessary potency ? or to that which is devoid of
" this potency ? If the latter, then you have the same absurdity
"as before (anything being produced of any cause). If the
"former, then, does this potency pertain to all things or only
"to certain things? If everywhere, then the same absurd contingency arises. If only in certain things, then it will have
"to be explained how, in the absence of the effects, the potency
"of the cause could be restricted to these? A» a nonentity can
"not be the object of anything. Hence on account of the
"efficient cause bringing about that for which it is potent, it
a
mus£ be admitted that this latter had prior existence.
"(4) Because of the identity of the effect with the cause.
"That is to say, the effect is found to be of the same nature
u
as the cause. Because the whole is nothing apart from its
"parts,—as it is found to occupy the same space as these parts;
, "and different things we find always occupyiug different places
I " or having different extensions; and it has been proved that a
M
thing that occupies the same space as another is nondifferent
•from this latter. And as the cause has been proved to be
" an entity, the effect cannot but be the same.
" These arguments have been summed in the Sdnkhya—
"Kärika—-9. ' AsadaJcaranät' &G?
To the above we make the following reply : If even before
the operation of the cause, the Cloth already exists in the
threads, then how is it that we do not see it, even wh«n we seek
for it, and our organs of vision are all right t It might be said that

310

PRA<?A8TAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

we donot see it because of its not having become manifested.
But, what is this ' non-manifestation' ? If by this you mean
merely ' want of perception/ then it is this very want of perception that we have put forward as inexplicable in accordance
with your theory; and hence that same fact cannot be accepted
as a right explanation of itself. If however by ' non-manifestation' be meant "the absence of such form as would be perceptible
and capable of effective action,' then this would amount to an
acceptance of the non-existence of the Effect (prior to causal
operation); as what this means is that something, in the shape
of that form, which did not exist before, is brought into existence by the operation of the cause.
Page 144] Objection : « For the perception of the Cloth, we
need the aid of such accessories as the action of the weaver,
and the like, just as much as that of the organs of perception :
and hence as long as these have not functioned, the Cloth
e ven though extant, is not perceived.'*
Reply: This can hot be ; because the acfion of its causes
would always be possible (and hence toe CJoth should be
always perceptible).
Objection : " Yes; but even this action of the causes which
remains un manifested at first, comes to be manifested by
means of causes; and then alone does it serve to render the
cloth perceptible."
Reply: If this 'manifestation' of the cause were non*
existent before, then (according to you) how could it be brought
about by any causes ? And if it were existent, then the (thing
would also be always perceptible. Hence the perception of
something not perceptible before could not be possible, until
some peculiarity, that did not exist there before, were pro*
duced in it.
Then» it has been argued above that, that which does not
exist cannot be produced by any causes.—e. g. «sky-flowera.'

QUALITIES; SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES,

311

But tbis is not right; as there is no analogy between the two
cases. That is to say, (sky-flowers ' are of the nature of nonentity pure and simple, while the things in question, jar and
the like, are such as have the dual character of entities and
non-entities; as prior to the operation of their causes they
remain non-entities, and when the causes operate duly, they
become entities.
Question : " How could these two contrary characters of
' entity' and * non-entity ' cohere in the same thing 1"
ÄTiswer: The coherence becomes quite explicable, when
the two are taken as existing'at different times.
Question: "As prior to its production, the object Cloth
would (according to you) be non-existent, how couldu non-existence/ a property, be postulated to it when it does not exist ?"
Answer : ' As the demon, so its offering'—i. e. our answer
will be of the same nature as your objection, exactly in keeping
with your way of arguing:—it is only * existence' that could
not belong a non-entity; as for ' non-existence' it is only proper
that it should belong to a non-entity.
Question: " If the thing were non-existent before, then
how does it come to have existence ?"
Answer: By the force of the operations of the Causes.
There is a peculiar power in the shuttle &c. on account of
which, whenever they come together and function in unison,
there appears some thing that did not exist before—viz., the
cloth.
Objection: " If something not existing before, and hence
not in any way connected with the causes, were to be produced
by these, then there would be a great disorder confusion (any
causes giving rise to any effects)."
Reply: This could not be; as the cause in the form of the
(thread) has its efficiency restricted to tka_ejgect in the form of
'Cloth'alone.

312

?RA<?ASTAPÄDA BHlSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10)
Question " How can that be ? "

Answer: How would that be, in accordance with yomr
theory also*?
Objection: " Well, in accordance with our theory, it is the
threads alone, and nothing else, that have the nature of, and are
nondifferent from, the Cloth,—such being the nature of things."
Reply: The same might be said in our case also. In fact
it is for this reason that there is & limitation or restriction as to
the natural causes of definite things;—the potency of one class of
things towards a certain definite class of things being ascertained by means of invariable concomitance, both positive and
negative.
Then again, it has been argued above that, the effect being |
nondifterent from the cause, the existence of the cause would
mean the existence of the effect also. But this is far from proved; A
and it is sought to be proved by a fact that itself has not been
duly established. As it is a patent fact that the effect differs
from the cause, in point of form, potency and position. Then
too, if the effect were in every way nondifferent from the cause, \
then the whole world, which is held by the Sänkhya to be a i
product of Primordial Matter, would be imperceptible,"as Primordial Matter is held to be so.
Then, as for the fact of the effect occupying the same extension in space as the cause, this idea is merely due to the fact f
of the effect resting in, having its receptacle int the tause. This
will be enough, and we need not press the " old people" (the 1
Sankhyas) any further.

We now proceed to consider—what is ' Potency," Sakti ?'
Some good people have declared that it is something saperseo«uous, imperceptible by the senses. But that is not right;
as there can be no evidence for the existence of any such
superseniaous Poteucy.

QUALITIES; SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES,

313

Objection: " We find fire under certain conditions produci n g the effect of burning; and at another time we find
" that the same fire under the same conditions does not produce
" any such effect}, when brought into close touch with certain
" incantation» or medicinal herbs; and if the visible form of
"the fire were the cause of the burning, then as the visible form
"of fire remains the same in the latter case also, there could
" not be an absence of burning. As a matter of fact however
"we do find this absent; and this clearly shows that there is
"some sort of incapacity in the invisible form of the fire; and
" thereby proves the fact of potency itself being something
" quite imperceptible, a potency the suppression or destruction
"whereof is brought about by the incantation &c. Incases
" where counter-remedies are found to revive the potency
" there has been a mere suppression, whereas when there is an
" absolute absence; of the necessary effect, there is destruction of
the potency.
[Page 145] " Objection : "The incantation is neither in contact
" with, nor inherent in the fire; and as'such how could it destroy
" the potency that existed in a wholly different substratum from
"itself? If it does destroy such things, then it would destroy
" anything and everything.'
"Reply: But the fact is that the incantation is aimed
" at the potency of the fire. Just as the 'murderous rites,'
" even though having no material connection with any person,
"kill only that person against whom they are aimed, and no
"other person,—so, in the same manner, the incantation would
"destroy the potency only of that individual fire against which
w
it would be aimed, and not of all fires.
u

Objection: ' If Potency is of the nature of Substance,
" then it could be destroyed only by the destruction, either of
"its material or of its immaterial cause: and if it b« held
" to be of the nature of Qualities, then it could be destroyed
_

314

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

"either by the destruction of its substratum, or by the production of another Quality of a contrary nature.1
"Reply: We do not admit of these conventional laws of
"yours. Whenever we find the destruction of one thing
"following from something else, we always regard this latter
"to be the cause of that destruction; and we do not accept
"any such hard and fast rules as you speak of; as all such
"rules are condemned by facts of direct perception. Even if
"it be absolutely necessary to accept your laws, we might accept
"them as applicable only to the destruction of those Substances
''and Qualities wherein they are found to be operative. Potency
"however is something like Similarity, wholly different from
" Substance, Quality and the other categories; and as such it
"could be open to other modes of destruction also.
" Objection: ' The potency of fire is inferred from the pro- ;
" duction or non-production of its effects; but how ia it that you \
" assume its existence io all things \
"Reply: Having in one case, that of fire, assumed its j
"existence on the strength of its effects, we infer, from similar f
"circumstances, its existence in other things> whenever we find
" these latter also producing definite effects."
To the above we make the following reply:—The absence
of the proper effects (of fire), in the presence of incantations &c,
does not indicate any invisible form. Because, just as of burning we regard fire to be the cause,—inasmuch as it has its power
of burning fully known by positive as well as negative concomitance,—so in the same manner is also the prior non-existence
of obstacles in the shape of incantation &c. accepted as the
cau£3 (of burning); and when this' non-existence' would be set
aside by the reciting of the lDcantatioo, it is only natural \
that there should be no burning, for the simple reason that the :
necessary accessory circumstances in the shape of the non-exis»
tence of obstacles would not be present,—and the almence of

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

315

burning thus would not be due to the absence of due 'potency*
in the fire.
Objection: " A positive effect is always found to proceed
from a positive cause,—and as such no positive effect (like burning) could have a negative cause (iu the shape of the non-existence of obstacles ')."
Reply: Not so ; because we find sin (a positiv« thing)
being produced by the non-performance of the accessary
religious duties ; if it were not so, then the laying down of
^expiatoTy rites for such ouwssious would be absolutely useless
and superfluous.
Objection: "The sin, involved in the non-performance of
necessary duties, is produced by the performance of some other
acts (at the time for which the necessary duties are laid down),—
and it is not d*ue to the mere non-existence,, or absence, of the
performance of those duties.'*
Reply: The non-performance of the necessary duties must
be regarded at least as an aid in the producing of the sin,—
specially as Sin is always found to appear when there is such
a non-perfomnance.
Objection : "In regard to the case of the burning "by fire when
there are counter-incantations, you have said that when the
obstacle (to burning) in the form of the incantation is put forth,
the absence of this obstacle ceases, and hence there is burning.
But in that case, when the obstacle would be set aside after
having been bronghfc in once, then too there could }>e no burning ; as there would be no prior non-existence of the abstacle
(which vwIII hare disappeared after having come ifl); and it is
such non-existence th-at you hold to be the cause of the burning.
As a matter of fact however, we find that when obstacles to
burning are set aside by means of counter-incantations,
burning does appear. And hence we conclude that no negative entity can be the cause ; and it is only positive Potency

316

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

that could be accepted as the cause ; and even in a case where
after the burning has been stopped by one i&cantation, and revived again by meaus of another incantation, we can safely assume that the former incantation held the potency in. check, and
the latter let it lose and made it operative again."
Reply: This is not admissible ; because so- long as a visible
explanation is available, we cannot rightly have recourse to
any invisible factors. As causes of certain effects (put forward
above) we may have certain circumstantial accessories aided
sometimes by the absence of preventive incantations, at other
times by the presence of favouring incantations; and what
objection have you gat to this explanation that you seek to
assume the existence of invisible substances ? As a matter of fact
we often find that a single effect has got various kinds of
circumstantial accessories for its cause. For instance, Fire is
produced out of the rubbing together of two sticks as well as
from the solar gem. This is the secret of the Logican's theory.
The secret of the Mfmänsa theory I have explained in the
Tattvaprahodha.
[Page 146-] Question: "We have understood that Conjunction
is the basis of the notion of two things heing joind together] but
what is the form of this Conjunction '{ and what are its varieties ?
In the text we have the expression c kathamlakshanah' ; and
here f katham'~kim, ' what;' as in the expression ' ko dhartnah kathanlakshanakah' ( Sahara-Bhäshya); and 'lakshana*
is' Suarüpa,' ' form.' "
The author gives the answer to this question; and in doing
this, he supplies the definition of Conjunction: Conjunction
is the coming together of two things that were apart from
each other. The qualification ' apart from each other' is added
with a view to distinguish Conjunction from Inherence.
The author next proceeds to point out the different kinds
_of Conjunction : It is of three kinds only. (1) Anyatarakar-

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

317

mcbjii—the conjunction brought about by the action of one of
the two substances in coatact; (2) Ubhayakarmaja—that
brought about by the action of both substances, and (3) Sanyognja—that due to another Conjunction. To the former
kind belongs the conjunction of an active or mobile,—.
substance with another substance which is inactive or immobile,—e. g. the conjunction of the fixed post with the
flying kite alighting up«>n it; and also that of all-pervading
substances with corporeal substances,—the ail-pervading subs*
tances being immobile and inactive, and the corporeal substances
being mobile aud of limited extension.
Objection : "In the case of two things or persons, both of
which are moving, though with different degrees of speed,—
we find them coining in contact with each other; and in this
case the Conjunction is surely due to the action of any one of
the two things ; why then should the first kind of Conjunction
be specified as that between an active and an inactive
substance ? "
Reply: True; but what is meant by * inactive' is only
that one of the two substances is devoid of the action that
tends to bring about the Conjunction (and not that it has no
action at all)
Some people say that in the case of the Conjunction of
the kite with the post, there is first, the Conjunction of the
atoms of the kite's feet with the head of the post; and then
that of the whole substance kite with the whole substance post;
and here the former Conjunction of the parts is 'due to action '
Karmaja, and the latter Conjunction of the two wholes is
'born of Conjunction,' Sanyogaja.
But this is not admissible ; specially as the Conjunction is
t>etween one active whole with another to We. Ifthisbenot
accepted, then, inasmuch as the parts also would be whole in
comparison with their own constituent parts, the Conjunction
born of action * ami ng wholes would become altogether im-

318

PRA<?ASTAPÄI>A BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (1«X

possible. And then it would become necessary to deny the
activity of ail wholes; or to set aside the definition of Action,
as ' the independent cause Conjunction aod Disjunction,'—atieast in so far as the action of vvholes is concerned. How many
of auch pitfalls shall I point out iu the way of those people who
renounce the paths of reasoning and the teachings of great
masters I
147.] As an instance of the Conjunction of the second
kind we have the collision of two thiugs moving in opposite
directions. By 'opposite directions are meant those directions,
by moving towards which two things come finally to obstruct
each other,—e. g. North and South; East and West. The compound * Viruddhadikkriyayoh ' is to be taken as * Karmadha~
raya ' in the first instance—' Viruddhe dicdu' * opposite
directions/—and then as Bahuviiki—' Virvddhadicoh kriya
yayordravyayoh' ' of the two substance whose actions are
towards opposite directions/ The collision of two substances—
e. g., that between two wrestlers or two fighting rams—is cited
as an instance of * ubhayakarmaja' Conjunction, because it is
due to the action of both the tilings concerned.
The third kind of Conjunction—the ' Sanyogaja' kind,—is
produced by one, two or many Conjunctions. As an example
of Conjunction produced by a single Conjunction, we have the
Conjunction of the shuttle with the duplicate-thread, brought
about by the Conjunction of the same shuttle with one of the
threads. In this case we find that from the previous single
Conjunction of the shuttle and the one thread, there proceeds
the Conjunction of the thread-duplicate, with that same shuttle,
which is in contact with the single thread that forms the material cause of that ' duplicate/—which in its turn, is without
any action of its own, and is the product of tbat thread which
beiog in contact with the shuttle is conjoined to the other
thread. This kind of Conjunction is also called * one brought
about by the contact of the cause with the noo-cause/—the

QUALITIES •. SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

319

thread belüg the * cause,' aad the shuttle the ' non-cause,' of the
'thread-duplicate', and the Conjunction of the shuttle with
this * duplicate/ inhering in both of these;
Of this Conjunction we accept the previous Conjunction to
be the cause, as we cannot lay our hands upon any other cause ;
and as such this declaration is based upon the law of* Pixriqeaha*
and the 'pratydsatti* or ' proximity' in this case, will be in ihe
form of the co-inherence of the cause in the same substance as
its effect,'—in as much as the cause, the contact of the shuttle
with the single thread, would inhere in the shuttle, wherein
would also inhere the effect viz: the contact of the shuttle with
the'thread-duplicate.'
Objection: " If one Conjunction were to produce another
Conjunction, then this would be something opposed to the Sutra
' gunäfcha gunäntwam ärdbhante* wherein it is said that
1
Qualities7 (in the Plural) produce another Quality,"
Reply: Not so; the objector apparently does not understand the sense of the Sutra, referred to ; as what the Sutra
means is that even Qualities-have the causal efficiency of producing a quality; and it does not mean that it is only many
Qualities,—and not one or two of them—that can produce
another quality. Some people hold that the sutra does specify
more than two Qualities as being productive of a quality, and
that this specification is with reference to those Qualities that
belong to the cause—and produce, in thn effect, qualities homogeneous to themselves, and it does not refer to all qualities;
(and that as such there is no contradiction of this Sutra
by the assertion that one Conjunction produces another Conjunction). Such explanations can suit only exceptionally clever
people who can invent unheard of explanations ; it can never
satisfy us.
As an instance of Conjunction produced by two Conjunctions
we have that of the ' thread-duplicate' with Äkä\a% brought
about by the contact of each of the two threads with Ak6$a.

320

PHAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

As soon as the ' thread-duplicate' is produced there immediately comes ahout a contact of this with AJcaga,—because^ifcrtpa is
ia coutact with the causes (the single threads) ot this 'duplicate/
like the shuttle in contact with the material, causes of the
' thread-duplicate* There is no other cause for this contact,
save the contact of the Äkäga with the two single threads
that go to make up the duplicate; and hence the contact
of the duplicate with Äkäga cannot but be regarded as produced by this contact of the Älcdca with the constituent
threads.
[Page 148.] As an example of Conjunction produced by many
Conjunctions we have the contact <>/ the Cloth with the Brush,
which proceeds from the many contacts of the Brush with the
many threads that make up the Cloth.
The threads are productive of the Cloth through many
intervening wholes—that is to say, some threads combine to
make up a certain substance, which forms an intervening
link between the threads and the fully prepared piece of
cloth. la regard to corporeal substances, there is no chance of
any such anomaly as that of two wholes occupying the same
point in space; as we do not admit of any whole inhering over
-exactly the same number of constituent parts as another whole;
for instance the Thread Duplicate—which is a whole made up
of two threads, inheres in two threads, while the Thread Duplicate inheres in these two threads and also in a third; how then
could these two occupy the same point in space ? It is for
this very reason that when a large piece of cloth has been
torn, we have notions of several piece-wholes of varying
dimensions; and when these are destroyed, then, if we were to
begin to make a cloth out of the same threads, it would be a
well nigh impossible task.
Objection: " If such were the case, then the constituent
particles of the child's body, accompanied by the particles of
food eaten, would produce quite a new body, even while the
previous body has not been destroyed."

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

321

Reply: Yes, they might so produce it; if all the previous
bodies, were perceptible while, the old body existed, or even
wheiL it is-destroyed,—as we fiad in the case, of the pieces of
cloth which are quite perceptible while the eutire piece exists,
as weil as when, it is torn to pieces. If however,, the previous
bodies be not thus perceptible, then the same,process could
/ ^rightly be applied to their qase;.as we-apply., processes paly
ia accordance with. the. facts as we actually perceive them in
\

ordinary experience.:•[•.-•• c - •
•; .-.-.•.-.
..».'..
This same reason meets' tne asserti on that, * in accordance
\with the theory- of the production of the producible* there
Would be no perception or comprehension of the- universe in
the atomic'state*T~äsi We have shown in the section on 'Earth/
that; atoms have trie haturer of producing such -perceptible
things-as the Triad aritt the like; Or even if the atoms were
to produce the Diads, and then along with these Diads the
Triads, and along-with the Triads, other substances,—-then too,
how could* there be any^imperceptibtlity in the universe ? As
in any cäsej- there wöatd be present ^och cönditioas öf percept
tibifity as largeness, multiplicity of constituent>mplecuUs, the
presence ?€>f- particular^ coiovsrsf and*sor^ forths>•> If evenr when?
tfyesei wauid;"! be present, the;-Untversc Wiere.impetceptibkriby
the senses, on accouot öfötsi.'having^ an imperceptible I and

of Diads (which are imperceptible) would be,(j[mperceptible,
andrrthence the whole universe also, made up of these^Triacfs,
would become imperceptible. Hence Ute objecCiorTcanudt apply
to the case'in questibo, And as; tor the Triads bot Wenig ma<fe
up" direcjjry pt atöro^'themselVes; wecau ouly refer to the arguments we have p.ut forward m thesectiou on Eartu.
A Question, is here put by. the ignorant; ""How can Hub
Copj u notions proceed from a. jingle Couj u u ct.i on/' .;
j... la reply, to this the^author;says.-—Yadd &c, ,]*he.n-there.iß
ft conjunction of two- atoms of Earth and Water,, there coree$

322

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHTA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10)

about simultaneously a conjunction of this Earth-atom with
another Earth-atom, and that of this water-atom with another
water-atom ; and from these two Conjunctions there result
simultaneously the two diads of Earth aud Water; as the Conjunction of two homogeneous things always rusults in a third
substance. Aud at the same time that there are produced,
in the Earth and "Water diads, the Colour &c, in accordance
with the Colour &c. of these respective causes,—at that very
time, there are produced, out of the conjunctions of material
cause and üoa-cau-ses, conjunctions of the effects of each of thosetwo. The 'two* meant here are the Earth and Water Diads;
and the * material cause and non-causes' of these are the Earth
aud Water atoms in contact with each other.—the Earth-atoms
being the cause of the Earth-Diad, and the non-cause of the
Water-diad ; and similarly the Water-atoms being the cause of
the Water-diad, and the non-cause of the Earth-Diad; and
from the Conjunction of these ctwo/ there results the conjunction of tbe Earth-Diad,—which is the effect of the Earth-atom—
with the Water-diad which is the non-effect of the Earth-atom;
and similarly also the conjunction of the Water-Diad, which
is the effect of the Water-atom, with the Earth-diad, which
is not an effect of the Water-atom; and thus from a single,
Conjuction we have two Conjunctions.
f
[Page 149] Question: " What are your proofs for accepting
the Conjunction of two heterogeneous atoms, in the Earth and
Water Diads?"
The author says in answer: Käranasanyoginä <&c. That
is to say the Earth-atom becomes related to the Water-diad,—
because it is in contact with its cause,—like the Cloth in contact with ehe Brush (through its cause, the Threads). The same
argument may be applied to the case of the Water-atom also.
In as much as the effect is always in contact with whatever
may be in contact with its material cause,—the Earth-diad
becomes conjoined with the Water-atom which is in contact
with the Earth-atom constituting that Earth-diad; and similarly

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

323

the Water-diad becomes conjoined with the Earth-atom which
is io contact with the Water-atam constituting that W&ter-diad.
Question: " How can there be any connection between
the Earth and the Water Diad-s, which may be io contact with
the cause and oon-cause of each other ? That is to say, how
can there be any connectiou between the Earth diads [which
may be connected with the Water-atom which is the cause of
the Water diad and the non-cause of the Earth diad ] and the
Water diad [which may be connected with the Earth-atom which
is the cause of the Earth diad, and the non-cause of the Water
diad]?
In answer, the author says : Tayorapi c£c. That i3 to say,
between the Earth-diad and the Water-atom, and also between
the Water-diad and the Earth-atom, there is the ' Sanyogaja'
Conjunction (i. e. Conjunction produced by Conjunction); and
from these two Conjunctions of the Earth and Water-atoms
follows the mutual Conjunction between the two Diads. In
this case too we have the same law as before—viz., that the
effect is in contact with something which, though not its cause,
is in Conjunction with its cause.
Objection: *' It is not right to say that Conjunction is of
three kinds only ; because there is a possibility of a Conjunction
that may be eternal (and this would not be included in any
one of the three kinds enumerated above)."
With a view to deny this, the author adds that there is
uo Conjunction that is not produced ; and this fact we deduce
from the fact of the omniscient sage, iu course of describing all
things in the universe, not haviug mentioned any such eternal
Conjunction, as he did with regard to the "atomic" dimension.
On this we can safely assert that an nuprodnccd (eternal) Conjunction is as great an impossibility as the 'sky-flower.' To
explaiu this farther: what we mean is that Conjunction is v.sver
unproduced, and not that there is no unprodnced Conjunction: as the latter form of the proposition would involve the

324

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CPAP. VI. SECTION (10).

;

fallacy of an impossible (non-existent) major term (' unproduced
Conjunction.')
^
Objection: i: The Conjuuctioo of the atom with Akäga is
eternal: as both of them are eternal, and they are never se- |
parate from each other. As for Kanada iioc having spoken ^of 1
this, thac may have been mistake ou his part; and to err is but ^
human."
,: 1
To this the Author replies—Par avyJunwoJiik &c. The ^
Conjunction aud Disjunction of the atom with the all-pervad- i
lug Akdga is ouly partial (at least as regards the latter), and
are produced by the action of the atom; just as the conjunction I
and disjunction of a man with the banyan tree (which exteudsall ]
over from the roots to the top), are due to his movements up |
and down the tree. Consequently there can be no eternity for |
the Conjunction of übe atom with Alcaca.
-:[Pag6 150-] Objection: "This you have succeeded in proving;
but what have you got to say to the Conjunction of two allpervading substances ? This Conjunction cannot be produced by j
the action of any one of the two, for the simple reason that
both are devoid of action. Nor could it be produced by any ;]
Conjunction, as a Conjunction born of Conjunction is possible
only when an effect is in contact with something that is not
its cause, but is in contact with this cause; and no such
coufcact is possible in; the case of omnipresent things as they
are ail eternal, and as such can have no causes. There is however a Conjunction among omoiprosent things; as can be
proved by the following argument—-Akäga is in Conjunction
with non-corporeal things also, because it conjoins with corporeal
things,—like the Cloth. And as there can be no cause for this
Conjunction it must be regarded as eternal; aud heuce we cans»
not admit that there i& no unproduced Conjunction."
•;;\a
Reply': VibKunira &c. As a matter of fact, we find thftt
Conjunction exists only among substances that have bad sepa-

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

325

rate existences; in the case of all-pervading1 substances there
can be no such separate existence ; and hence the coadition
of greater extension (i. e., separate existence) is not fouud to
exist in these substances; consequently tho resultant condition of lesser extension cannot possibly exist. As for the argument the opponent has pat forward, that does not prove anything ; as it applies equally to both sides of the question. That
is to say, just as it lays down the Conjunction, of omnipresent
things, so also does it prove their Disjunction also, by the very
same premiss and example.
Objection : " It may be so ; and so we must accept both, as
^ proved by convincing arguments."
Re/ply: That cannot be; as between Conjunction and
Disjunction, if one is eternal, the other is absolutely impossible;
and as the two are contradictory, and the argument applies
equally to both, it cannot be accepted to prove either.
Question: " What is this ' separate existence, ' on the
absence whereof in omuipresent substances, you base your denial
of Conjunction in them ?"
Answer: Sä punah Sec. By *yuta8iddhi*'separate existence,' is meant the moving apart of one or both of the things
concerned, as regards eternal substances; as regards non^eternal
substances, what is meant by it is the haviug of a receptacle
or substratum apart from that of the other. And none of these
two kinds of 'separate existence' is possible in the case of AJcdga.
The destruction of all Conjunction follows from the Disjunction inhering in the same substrata as the Conjunction.
That is to say, whenever there is a disjunction of two things,
Conjunction is destroyed forthwith. Though at the time of
the Disjunction the Conjunction exists, yet the t^o are never
found to co-exist; ,aucJ this may be due either to the destruction
of £he Conjunction appearing very quickly (after the Disjunc-

326

PKACA3TAPÄDA BtfÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

tion), or to the fact of the perception of Conjunction being obstructed by the Disjunction.
In some cases Conjunction is destroyed by the destruction
of its substratum. As for instance, when two threads are in contact, if there appears, by some cause or other, sn action in any
part of one offell«two threads, then there arises Disjunction of
that part from another part; and this disjuuction destroys the
contact of the parts, which means the destruction of the thread
(to which those parts belonged); and then there follows the destruction of the Conjunction that had this thread for one of its
substrata; as a Conjunction can never exist without two substrata ; and hence when one of these substrata is destroyed, it
cannot be found to exist.

[Page 151.] Text (89): Disjunction is the basis of the
idea of two things being * disjoined.'
It consists in the separation of two things that have
hitherto been in contact. I is of three kinds: (1)
Produced by the action of any one of the two
things, (2) by the action of both, and (3) by an- •
other Disjunction. The first two are like the
similar hinds of Conjunction; and that produced
by another Disjunction is of two kinds ; as proceeding from the disjunction of causes and. from
th<tt of the cause and the non-cause. The former
of these we find when there appears an action
in the cause as possessed by the effect, then that
action brings about the disjunction of that cause
from its other parts, and from the place occupied
by Ähäca &c.; and tvhen it does bring about
its disjunction from the place occupied by Akaca
<£&, then there is no disjunction from its other
parts. Such being the case, the action of the
part must be regarded as producing the Disjunc-

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

327

tionfrom another part only. From this Disjunction follovjs the destruction of the Conjunction
that serves, to keep the substance intact. And
on the destruction of this, the substance as a composite whole is destroyed, as the effect could not
survive the destruction of the cause. Then the
Disjunction present in Hue two causes brings about
the disjunction of the active part, from that point
of Äkäca—which may be in contact xvith the
effect,—ivith reference either to the time qualified
by the aforesaid destruction of the effect., or to the
part independently by itself. This Disjunction
could never be that of a part that would be inactive ; as in the case of such a part there would be
no cause for such disjunction; and further, no
further Conjunction appearing after this, the
disjunction would become -altogether purposdess.
The said action of the part however does not bring
about a Disjunction from the point of Äkäca &c;
as that action is past before the bringing about of
any such disjunction. But that action does bring
about the conjunction of another point of space ;
as no action ever becomes lost in time until it
has produced some sort of a Conjunction.
Question: " How can Disjunction proceed from the Disjunction of the cause and non-cause t"
[Page 152-] Answer: When an action takes place in the
hand (as when the hand is waived} and without
disjoining the hand from any other part of the
body, it disjoins it from a particular point in
Äkäca and joins it to another point in it,—then
we have such' Disjunctions of the cause and the
non-cause' as bring about the 'disjunctions of
the effect and the non-effect,' with reference to
that point in space towards which the action is

328

PRACASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).
prone to produce its effect After this that same
action produces, out of the conjunctions of the
cause and the non-cause, the conjunctions of the '*
effect and the non-effect And if after the, Did
junction of the cause there appear the disjunction I
of the effect, then after the Conjunction of the
cause there would he the Conjunction of the effect
Objection: "This ivould involve the absurdity of the
whole and its parts having existences apart from :%
one another!'
Reply: Not so ; as apparently you-do not understand
what is meant by * separate existence * In the
case of eternal things it only means ' separate or
. distinct movement or action*,' and in that of the
tra risitory things, it means the 'inherence or existmceitidistinct substrata.* In the case of the Organ of Touch and the Body there is no ' distinct
movement] but they are'inherent in distinct substrata'; and it is forl this reason that the relationskip between these two is that of Conjunction (and
[
7botof 'Inherence* which would have to be admitted
if 'separate existence* meant only 'distinct motion'
aa there would be absence of this in the case in
question, and it is only this absence thaf. is the
necessary condition of Inherence), In the case of
the Atom and theÄkaca however, eventJwugh they
have no other, substrata (and as such the two
would appear io bear the relationship of Inkerencej yet in as much as each of them is capable of independent action or motion (there can be
no Inherence), and Conjunctions and Disjunctions between them,become possible. In the case
of the Yarn and. the Cloth however, both of which
are transient, in as ranch <ts they do not inhere

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES..

329

in distinct substrata (and are not capable of
separate action or motion), there is no possibility,
of Conjunction and Disjunction (and the relationship id th it of Inherence). In as much as all
Disjunction is momentary, and exists only till
Oie next Conjunction, its destruction also is
••
momentary, in the case of Conjunction we have
••'•••
found that it'is destroyed by the disjunction of
8 *•' • ••'•'• • 'those'very things that have been in conjunction ;
| ,' > suck is- not the, case with Disjunction; it is not
] -.•:
destroyedr:only by the Conjunction of'the two things
f ..-:.,
disjoined; because the idea of two things beiny disJ
r
-v .
joined is not continuous like'that of their^beivg
;
ccmjoixLed (Le, the idea of Disjunction appears
:,^
. ^ \ionly'<at the moment oj separation, while that
?•:-.-of{Conjunction continues as'long a* the Con- • -•.
u~j>uxictipn itself lasts;.) If&uce- Disjunction is
.
/regarded as .momentary only on account of its
. . existence being-exvcuUd by the next Conjunction*
, in some cases Disjunction is destroyed by the
..destruction-of.its substratum,..,. ' How ? ' When in
a. part, of one. of the yarns of a ' duplicate yarn*
an action is produced, it brings about its disjunction from another part of the same yarn;
and at that very time an action is produced in
the other yarn als». This Disjunction leads to
the destruction of the cohesive Conjunction of the
substance; and Hie action in the yarn produceg
a Disjunction from Hie other yarn. This cons*
t'didea one moment of time. Then, at the time
'
that the Disjunction brings about the destruction
of the Conjunction of the yams, there also follows
from that destruction of the Conjunction, the des*
'-•;•
tructi&n of the yarn. And this being destvoyod,
the re, follows the destr notion of the. D iqju action of
the other yarn, which has the former yarn for its
substratum.
25

•-"-•••

-

330

PRA£ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION" (10.)
Objection: " / / such were the case then there would be
" no chance of the coming about of any subsequent
" Disjunction ; as there would be no Disjunction
" 'present that could serve as the cause of any
"subsequent Disjunction. Hence, in as much as
" there would be no Conjunction in a thing in
n
contact with another point in space, the action
"(in the yarn) would continue for along time,
" specially as no contrary quality (in the shape of
"another Conjunction) would be appearing; and
" that action which would be inhering in an
" eternal subrtance would be eternal; and all this
'couldnever be admissible. 'Hoxo soV When an
11
action appears in the atom of the Water~diad,
" and brings about its Disjunction from another
*' atom,—at that very time there appears an action
" in the other atom also; and hence at the time that
u
the disjunction gives rise to the destruction of the
" cohesive conjunction of the%ubstance,at that very
" time the action of the other atom brings about
" the disjunction of the atom from the Mad; and
il
then, at the time that Disfunction produces the
li
destruction of the Conjunction of the Diad and
11
the Atom, at that very time from the destruction
" of the Conjunction follows the destruction of the
14
Diad. And this being destroyed, the Disjunction
u
of the Dmd and the atom resting therein is also
"destroyed. And then, there being no possibility
41
of the appearance of any contrary quality
" there would be an eternality of the action
" inhering in the eternal substance (Atom)."
(Page 154-1 Reply:—In as much as the Disjunction would
follow from the Disjunction of the yarn from its
otlter part, there would be none of the absurdity
urged above. The destruction of the substratum

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

331

destroys only the Disjunction of the two yarns
and that of the yarn and its other parts; and from
this latter Disjunction would proceed other subsequent Disjunctions; just like the Disjunction of
the Body and alclaa following from that of the
finger-tip and dkdsa; and as the action brings
about the Conjunction and becomes destroyed,
there is no anomaly in this. Or, simultaneously
with the appearance of the Disjunction of the yarn
from, its other vart there appears in that same
yarn an action; and then from the Disjunction
of the yarn from its other part there follows the
destruction of the cohesive Conjunction of the yarn;
and the action of the yarn brings about its Disjunction from another yarn; oil this forming
one unit moment of time. Then from the destruc*
tion of the Conjunction there follows the destruction of the yarn; and this destruction brings
about simultaneously the destruction of the
Disjunction and the action inhering therein. Or,
when (during weaving) there is a Conjunction of
the yarn with the Brush, as (at that point of time)
no substance is produced, we would have the destruction of the Disjunction of the yarn and the
brush, brought about by the destruction and Conjunction of the substratum,—all this occuring in
the same process as explained before*

Commentary.
Ä.8 Disjunction is always preceded by Conjunction the
author having dealt with the latter, proceeds to explain the
former: The verbal explanation of the first sentence is in the
oarne manner as that of the similar sentence in the preceding
se.c Hon.

332

PRA9ASTAPÄ.DA BHÄSH YA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10)

. . Objection: " The notion of 'disjoined' is present only when
there is an absence of Conjunction (and hence Disjunction canopt be anything apart from such absence)."
Re'piy: Until there is a Disjunction, whence could the
absence of Conjunction aiise ?
Objection: "It'is brought about by action."
Reply r:; That;.cannot be;] as, no action is ever found to
have thev power of destroying; a.quality. It is qualities alone
that, are found to be destructive of qualities; and heuce r tbe
destruction of Conjunction also we. must postulate a distinct
quality as the cause.
J

V;

A»d further, in the case1!of the "absence of Conjunction,"
the nation that we have is in the negative form—'these two
things are not joined* andnotin the positive form 'these are
disjoined"; arid the reason for this is that a negative entity
v^senee' of 'Conjunction:>)' could not be conceived of iu the
ipösitive1 fbritf. ' : ' ' ; ;
\-, Qbi;..."The.fbjm of t^notion^may ,be said,to be figurative
-/.thejaos^ive,(orm cot&ldfigurative|,y.apply:to a negative entity)/1
s>iu ^Tb&pdy\ ThiBn^that would not mean ä debial of Disjunction;
fo£uniessJther-ebe some positivei thing' tö whiöh tbe form of the
nötifmicoufd apply directly; it could- no«, have any mere figurativeimpüi
^^'•
[Page 155]- T^ive effects of Pjj junction are ne^t shown:—&abdavibkäga rtc, Disjunction is not merely the basis of the notion of
disjoined/ but it is also the basis'of the production of sound.
As for instance, when a banibooi»;tonj, the sound that proceecis
must be regarded a*» .due to another .quality,—because it is a
8ÖÜUU, like the^ sound born of the conjunccion of the stick t and
ihe drum ; the sound in question however could not be due to a
Conjunction; as no Conjunction islound to~ be present in the
ca«e; heoce it must Üe accepted to be produced from the separa-

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

333

tion or Disjunction of the bamboo-fibre-*; as it is found to beinvariably concomitant with this. How Disjunction can be the
cause of a further Disjunction we shall explain later on.
The definition of Disjunction is given in the form—-Präptu
purvikz <&cf Just as the negative word ' Adharma' is applied
not to tlie mere absence of Dkarma, hut to a distinct quality,
the opposite of Dharma ; so in the same manner, the negative
word 'apräpti' is applied, not to the mere absences of approach.
or contact, but to a distinct quality, the opposite of approach
or contact; and it is to this quality that the name rDisjunction'
is given.
Question: "Istbe 'präptä you speak, of a mere antecedent
of the Disjunction, or has it any causal efficiency towards the
bringing about of the Disjunction ?'*
Answer: WTe bold: that it is only an antecedent. If Conjuoction.(which would-be the same as ' präpti') were the cause of
Disjunction, then as soon as the two constituent molecules of a
substance would come together, this Conjunction, being endowed
with thexauaal efficiency towards Disjunction, would bring this
latter about, and thus there being a disruption of the molecules; na existence would be possible for the whole composite
Objection: "It is not mere Conjunction by itself, but Conjunction afdecl. by certain actions, which must be regarded as the
;
cause of Uiijunctr6h."
.
" ; * ;• : J
.,;v 'i
:: \ Reply ;;:Then we can have for the requisite cause, thiaac
tion itselfvWitlx.vyhieb the DisjuQctipa may be found to be invariably concomitant; (and no causal efficiency need be admitted
in the Conjitucübn)" specially as Disjunction is not found to fallow
always when Corijunction is present. Hence we conclude that,
as in the case of the^ production of Destruction, we regard
' existence' as a mere antecedent, so in that of the production
of pisjjinction also, Conjunction can be regarded as onljr

334

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAI\ VI. SECTION (10).

preceding it in time ; as Disjunction is a quality of a nature contrary to that of Conjunction.
Disjunction is of three kinds only :—the limitation of the
number being indicated by the particle ' cka.' The three kinds
are—(1) that brought about by the action of any one of the two
things concerned ; (2) that brought about by the action of both,
and (3) that brought about by Disjunction. The first two kinds
are similar to the corresponding two kinds of Conjunction. That
is to say, just as the Conjunction of the mobile with the immobile object is of the first kind, so also is the Disjunction of
the mobile from the immobile object. And as to the second
class belongs the Conjunction of two righting rams or wrestlers,
so also does the Disjunction of those belong to the secoud kind.
The third kind of Disjunction is of two kinds : (it is this
difference from the first two kinds that is meant to be indicated
by the particle '£«-'): There is one Disjunction due to the
Disjunction of the causes, and another is due to that of the cause
from the non-cause. The Disjunction due to the Disjunction of
causes is thus explained : when an action is produced in the cause
pervaded by the effect, then it produces in it a Disjunction of
one of its component particles from another, a Disjunction that
tends to the destruction of the cohesive Conjunction of that
substance; and at that time that action does not bring about
any Disjunction of the substance from the point of space occupied by it; and at the time that this latter Disjunction is
brought about, there is no trace of the former Disjunction of
the parts. H<*nce it is on account of this general rule that the
action uf the component parr, brings about the Disjunction from
another component part and from the point of space &c.
[Page 156.] The sense of all this is aa follows : The power, in the
action, of bringing about the Disjunction from Äkäga, is pervaded by (i, e. is always concomitant with) its power of not brioging about any such Disjunction as would be incompatible with
(t. e.t destructive of) the cohesive Conjunction of the Substance;

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

335

and this latter power is opposed by the power of bringing about
a Disjunction that would be incompatible with the cohesive Coojunction of the Substance; consequently, wherever this last power
would be present, there that other power of not bringing about
such a Disjunction would naturally become excluded ; aud the
exclusion of this would mean the exclusion of its concomitant,
the power of bringing about the Disjunction of Äkä$a ; just as
the exclusion of fire means the exclusion of smoke.
Objection: Between the power of bringing about the
Disjunction of Äkäe.a, and that of not producing a Disjunction
incompatible with the cohesive Conjunction of a substance,—
there is mere concomitauce, and not an absolutely invariable
concomitance, (as between Fire and Smoke) (and hence the
exclusion of the latter would not necessarily involve the
exclusion of the former)/'
Reply : It is not so; because we never find these two powers
apart from each other. It is only when we, in some cases,
perceive two things apart from each other, and in other cases,
together,—that we conclude that there is mere occasional concomitauce between them;—e. g. the Earthiness and scratchibility by Iron are not found together in the Thunderbolt, though
we find them together in a piece of wood ; in the case of the
two powers in question however, we never fiud them apart from
each other. Even then we might have been led to suspect
that they may have separate existence, only if their concomitance were due to certain external conditions, as we find in
the case of the meeting of the pupil and the teacher; as a
matter of fact, however, such is not the case; as we do not
find any such external conditions. Then if such a concomitance,—
independent as it is of all external conditions, and unfailing as
it is actually found to be—were not accepted as absolutely
invariable, then there would be no invariable concomitance
between Fire and Smoke either; and thus all Inferential processes would be done away with at a single stroke.

336

PRAQASTAPÄ'DA BHÄSHYÄ—CPAP.' Vl. SECTION (10).

Question: " Even i£ the action of the part were to bring
abont Disjunction from another part, and not (torn the Ak&qa
what would that prove ?"
• •{
Answer: From the Disjunction follows the destructioüof
the cohesive Conjunction o/tlie substance: 'THa'tisTtblrskf', ifL\t
were to bring aboutDisjunctionfrom' ÄJdagä', then,asnÖ specific
disruption within the substance Itself would be brouglit about,
there would be no^destruction of the''cohesive CdnjaDCtioü oif
the substance.;; ';• • •-.... •-_ •->,.,•• :.,--.,..,-;, . ,:;i... :-l}
-.'.••r Question :--.:M What:would follow from the destruction M
thl3 Got)JU DCtioil^ ":,..;• '
•.•-.-...::»•• ..-.if ^ir-1/ -?io; / •.;.: iTIOSiii
- !47Mrw^r':':! -Tfre Conjuhctiob;^ which is "the fnoti-matetTyi
cause of the aubstancei'' "having been 'destroyed, aridr ho effect
being possible when there is no cause,—tlifere -would follow* tbe
destruction of the composite whole. And^he'compösite^i^stance having been destroyed, the Disjunction .of the convponent
parts would bring about the Disjunction of; the active? part iron}
that point in space: which had.been in contact w$h the composite
substance,—this Disjunction being either witU reff cenceijta t)}e
particular point of time, qualified by; the ^lestructipn of tfe^e
substance, pr feQ. the?.part itself indepeDdentljFr of,> alI« other
things. ...So lon^ as the composite substancevoisrnpji.v,destroyje4,
there 13,iln iti^ej component: part,? neither injde
norj any capability of moving to another pla^g
heuceitUljthen tj^^e isrnso.po^sibility^of Any^D
point bfjSpace loccjupied by^he p^rfe Ä i* fflHi th4swrea!u>/9rthat
.we,have said? that what is needed is. either,the,.point .Qf.,time,
qualified,by.the..destjtrUctian of the, ^ub8tance,.j or.\independent
.exigence.;,,,..,,..,., : ,.,, -: .... -•:• ,;_. .i;:;:,:.. i.,,,,,,^., Mnu yiIiJ iy>%
Question: " What reason h»ve you got for^asspjtin^ thait
thepresent Disjunction of the component pa itjiaies, lyings, about
the Disjunction of the active pjirtonly I" ; •;.,,;.. ^ o - ^ •;
Answer: It could not bv that of the?• inactive:'part,
because of the absence of the requisite cause. In ih& production

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DI3SIMILARITIES,

337

of Disjunction from Disjunction, we have Action (Motion) also
as the efficient cause ; and as in the inactive part, this cause
would be absent, there could be no Disjunction of that part.
Another reason for the same is all that action or motion
appears for the purpose of bringing about a subsequent Conjunction ; as it always tends to fulfil the desirable ends of a
man by means of the substance that will have reached another
poiut in apace. Then, if there were no Disjunctoin of the
active or mobile part from such point in space as would be in
contact with the component substances, then there would be no
cessation or removal of the preceding Conjunction, which is
an obstacle in the way of the subsequent Conjunction ; and
thus no subsequent Conjunction appearing, the original action
would become wholly futile; and this would be far from desirable. Hence it must be admitted that the Disjunction is
that of the mobile or active part only. Nor is it possible for
the action or motion of the two component parts to briug
about the Disjunction from Äkiga, simultaneously with the
Disjunction of the component whole.
[Page 157] Objection: " Wo grant that the action docs not
bring about the two Disjunctions simultaneously; but what would
be the objection to its bringing them about, one after the other?
It is only on account of some such objection that we could
be justified in precluding this action, which has been found to
be possessed of the capability of bringing about a Disjunction,
and admitting the fact of the Disjunction (from Akäca &c.)
being due to another Disjunction which has never beeu found to
be endowed with the said capability."
Reply : The, motion of the part docs not bring about
Disjunction from ihe point in space, because of the passing
off of the time of Us production. The nature of acf«'.ms ia such
that they produce, immediately after their pwn appearance, the
Disjunction which is living produced by the actions themselves
as the non-material cause. And the time of the production of

338

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

this Disjunction becomes past at the time of the appearance of
another Disjunction ; and hence this latter can uever be said to
be produced from those actions.
Objection: "In that case, how does the action bring about
the subsequent Conjunction ? As certainly there are many intervening moments of time between the appearance of the action
and that of the Conjunction."
Reply : It brings about the Conjunction of another place.
Just as the point of time immediately after the appearauce
of the action is the moment for its bringing about Disjunction, so, in the same manner, the point of time immediately
after the previous Conjuuction is the moment for the appearance of the Conjunction of another place. Specially as the
substance located in the former place cannot possibly reach
another place. Nor is the time for the appearance of the Conjunction past; as the time would have become past if the action
had previously brought about the Conjunction of another place ;
as a matter of fact however, it is not so; hence in as much as
the action will not have brought about any Conjunction, the
time for its bringiug about a Conjunction^ will not have passed
off; and hence the action would bring about a Conjunction, but
not a Disjunction, if the Conjunction were not brought about
by the action, then,—in as much as there would be no other
action, aatl as nothing could be brought about without a nonmaterial cause,—the only thing that could be regarded as the
cause of the Conjunction would be the Disjunction inhering in
the same substauce with itself. The word ' iti' indicates the
end of the process.
Having thus understood Disjunction of a thing brought
about by the Disjunction of its Material cause, the Enquirer
wishes to understand the character ofthat Disjunction which is
brought about by the Disjunction of the Cause and Non-cause.
A.nd with this view he puts the question—"How &c.?"

QUALITIES; SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

339

The answer is—When Sec. When, by some cause or other,
ao action or motion is produced in the hand, it does not disjoin the hand from the other pirts of the body; but it does
bring about its Disjunction from^certain points in space, as also its
Conjunction with other parts in space ; and .then we have what
has been called the " Disjunction of the cause and the NonCause ";—there being the Disjunction of the hand (which is the
component cause of the Body) from the points in space (which
are not the cause of the Body); and this Disjunction brings
about the Disjunction of the Body (which is the effect of the
Hand) from the. point in space (which are not its effects); all
these Disjunctions b^ing brought about in that same direction
towards which the disjunctive action (or motion) tends, and
towards that same poiut iu space where this succeeding Conjunction is to be brought about; when, for instance, we find the
Hand being disjoined from a point in a wall, we have the Disjunction from that point in the wall, of the Body also (to
which the Hand belongs); and yet this latter Disjunction is not
the effect of the action or motion of the Body,—the Body at
that time being absolutely at rest; nor can this Disjunction
of the Body be the effect of the action of Che Hand ; because
we have never seen an action producing a Disjunction elsewhere than the substratum in which it itself appears; and it is
for this reason that we postulate, as the cause of this Disjunction,
.the aforesaid Disjunction of the Cause and Non-cause.
The word tädit in the expression 'äfcäsädi' is meant
to include other omnipresent things; and it is for this reason
that we have the plural ending in 'vibhägän'—the Disjunctions
of such oranipreseut things are of an endless number.
Some people argue thus: " Aa a matter of fact we find that
the Disjunction of the Body from the wall, is simultaneous
with that of the Hand from it; and as such it is contrary to
a perceptible fact to assert that these two Disjunctions bear to
each other the relation of cause ami effect."

340

PRACASTAPÄDA B HASH Y A—CHAP. VC. SECTIOtf (10).

But this is most unreasonable ; because at the time of tbe
Disjunction of the Hand, there is no cause present for the Dis*
junction of the Body; as an effect is not possible without its
cause ; and we have already sai$ above that the action of the
Hand cannot be its cause. Hence it must be admitted that
the sard idea of simultaneity is a mistake.
Objection: "The fact of the Disjunction o£ tbe Body appearing after that of the Hand can be proved only by Inference;
while their simultaneity is perceived directly by the Senses; and
so long as a contrary fact of Sense-perception is present, no
Inference can be effective; as any such Inference would be
negatived and set aside by the Sense-perception and as such
would not fulfil the only condition of validity. Under the
circumstances, how can we regard the fact of Sense-perception
to be a mistake, on thersole strength of an inferential fact?"
Reply: How do you fiud Inference operative in the case
of the piercing of the many petals of the lotus—where though
the piercing is perceived to be simultaneous, yet such simultaneity is universally regarded to be not true.
Objection: "Ah Inference contrary to Sense-perception ceases
to operate only when the matter is decisively pointed out by
the Utter to be of a character contrary to that pointed out by
the Inference ; in the case of the lotus-petals however the
matter is doubtful; a» it is quite possible «hat the perception *
of simultaneity may be due to the extremely quick succession
in which one petal is pierced after the other. On the contrary
however we have the decisive premiss universally recognised
that the needle pierces an object only when it is in direct contact
with it and nofc otherwise (and as all the petals cannot be in \
contact with the needle atone and the same time, the piercing
cannot be simultaneous); and hence even though there is a per- \
ceptible fact to the contrary, yet, as it appears to be doubtful, :
there is every room for the operation of this contrary Inference
which is fully decisive on the point."
i

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

34*

Meply: The evidential strength of the proposition that,
* an auction does not bring about any Disjunction apart from
iU own substance/ being quite unimpeachable, and the perceptible fact being capable of being explaiuecl away differently,
the Inferential reasoning about the sequential Disjunctions
becomes fully established. And it is on this aocount that it is
regarded as setting aside the aforesaid perceptible fact. Specially as the Inference has a distinct object to operate upon; whereas the perception has no basis, being, as it is, due to the extremely quick sucoession iu which the two Disjunctions appear; and
that means of knowledge which has an objective basis, is on
aocount of the aid of that basis, stronger in its authority than
another which is weaker on account of its being devoid of such
objective basis. Then again wheuever a perceptible fact is said
to be set aside by an inferential conclusion, the setting aside
18 done, not by Inference, but by another perceptible fact upon
which tbe premisses oi the inference are based. For instance,
we find such settings aside in the case of a man having mistaken notions of the direotions,—this being admitted by all
experienced ^persons, who declare that in such cases Inference
is more authoritative than perception. In the case of such perceptions however, as that of the heat of fire, we find that it is
not capable of being in any manner explained away ; and hencewhen the object has been once cognised by means of it, it can
never be set aside by any Inferential reasoning.
{Page 159.] Question: " On what ground do you assume the
fact of one cognition being set aside by another ?"
Answer: Because we find that while bearing upon the same
object, they contradict each other. For instance, a single object
iff apprehended by one Cognition as Silver, and by another as
Shell', and it is not possible for one and the same thing to be
both ; as we always tind Silver to be something distinct from the
Shell. Thus then, there being a contradiction between the
objects of the two cognitions, we conclude tha,t the cognitions

342

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

also are contradictory; aod as such one should naturally set aside
the other.
Question : " What do you meaa by this * setting aside/
Bädha'V
Answer; It consists in the taking away (or depriving) of
the object
(Objection ' In the case of the shell, even after it has
" been recognized as shell, there still continues the object that
" was illumined by the previous Cognition of silver ; and as
" for actual silvei\ that never existed ; and as such what is it
lt
ol the previous cognition of silver, that has been ' taken-away*
"by the succeeding coguition of the shellt For certainly 4 taking
" away' can be nothing more than destroying the connection
"of one thing with another.
" Objection; ' Though the silver did not exist, yet it did
" appear in the cognition (and hence it can very well be taken
«* away by the subsequent cognition)/
" Reply: True it did appear in the cognition. But this
'*appearance in the cognition cannot be taken away; for the
<(
simple reason that it is a fully accomplished fact; certainly
" that which has once appeared, can never be reduced to the coo*
'* ditiou of the non-appeared.
" Objection: 4 Though in reality the silver did not exist,
" yet it was shown, by the cognition, as existing; and the
"separation or removal of this as manifested by cognition.
44
would consist merely in the putting forward of the contradictory
" of that cognition/
4
* Reply: In that case, all that the setting aside would do
" would be to prove the non-existence of silver; and in what way
44
could that affect the cognition of silver ? This cognition only
44
manifested the silver and made it cognisable ; it did not bring
4(
it into existence ; and tliis manifestation was duly effected bf
'4 the mere appearance of the cognition; and then what is there
" that could be set aside by the nubsequent cognition of the »hellt

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

343

Reply: Wfaeu the absence of silver has been cognised, it
becomes patenfc that the previous cognition of $ilver was one
that had uo basic objective reality,—1. e. it waa false ; and it is
m this way that the idea of the non-existence of silver affects
the cognition of silver.
Objection: "In this way then, what is taken away from
the cognition is its phala (the resultant activity of the cogni«
ser), and not the object as said before ; because wheneyer a
cognitionis regarded as false, it does not give rise to any activity."
ReplyVsJSot so; because the taking away of the resul~
tant activity is concomitant with that of the object itself. It is
not always that a cognition rests in its resultant activity; as this
activity is always dependent upon the will of the person ; and we
often find a cognition ending in mere indifference, and not leading to any activity at all. Even in cases where it does lead to a
resultant activity, this latter is tied down to the object; and the
object being in its turn tied to the cognition, any setting aside
of the coguition would invariably mean a deprival of the object,
and of the resultant activity; as the deprival of the latter would
naturally follow upon that of the former. We desist from further
details on this point, which we have explained in the Sangrahatika.
In as much as what follows after the * Disjunction born
of Disjunction/ is the * Conjunction born of Conjunction' of the
substance that has long been produced, the author now pro«
ceeds to explain this Conjunction, which he had promised to do
before (in the section ou 'Conjunction ').
j
f
After that &c. After the ' Disjunction born of Disjunction I
the action of the Hand having g ven rise to the Conjunction of the Hand, which is the component cause, with it* noncauses, the points in space,—from this Conjunction follows
the Conjunctions of the inactive Body, which is an effect of
the Hand, with its non-causes», the points in space; and this
latter Conjunction is not brought about by the action of the
Hand ; as all that this action cau do is to carry ita own

344

PRA<?A8TAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

trat um (the Hand) to another point in space. The particle
' iti' indicates the conclusion of the subject.
[Page 160] An objection is started ; u If &c. That is to say, if
from the Disjuuctiou of the Cause, the Hand, there follow the Disjunction of the Effect, the Bod}*,—then, if from the Conjunction
of the cause were to follow the Conjunction of the effect, and
there would be no simultaneity in that case,wa would have the
whole and its parts having a separate existence; and they would
be independent of one auother. That is to say, if the Body
really inheres in the Hand, then whenever the Hand would move
the Body should also move along with it; and in that oase
there could be no sequence in the appearance of their Conjunction« and Disjunctions (as described above); and on the other
hand, if their Conjunctions and Disjunctions were to appear one
after another, then that would] mean that the Body would not
move when the Hand would move, aud the two would be
independent of each other/'
Reply : Not so; there could be no such anomaly of :
" separate existence." Because, apparently you do not seem
to uuderstaud what "separate existence" means: what it means
is the capability, in the two things concerned, of initiating or
containing an action calculated to bring about Conjunction and
Disjunction between themselves. " Separate existence " in the.
form of "separate movement" applies only to eternal substances,
e, g., in the case of two atoms of Äkä<ja for instance. The particle
' tu' meaning only, should be construed with ' nityrinäm,'—1
the sense being that this'kind of 'separate existence* belongs
to eternal substances only. As for transitory substances, on
the other hand, their **separate existence,' consists in their
'inherence iu separate substrates;' that is to say, they are
regarded as having ' separate existence ' when it is found that
one or both of them inheres in substrates different from the
other—'Inherence' here meaning having distinct relationships
of the container and the contained. As for instance, in the

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

345

case of the Bird and Space we find that one of them, the Bird,
is not the substratum of space, and as such has a distinct
" inherence." Though in this case we also dad one of the two
having a distinct motion aUo, yet we take no account of this,
as this has been explained as pertaining to eternal substances
only.
Question: " How is it that you do not define the * separate
existence * of transitory substances also as consisting in separate
movement 1"
Answer: In the case of the Organ of Touch and the Body,
we find that there is no separate movement; and yet they inhere ia distinct substrates; and hence the relationship between
them is one of Conjunction, and not of Inherence; while if among
transitory 'substances also " separate existence " were to consist
in 'separate movement/ then as these two are never found to
have 'separate movement,' they would be regarded as ' inseparate ' or ' inherent; * and hence the relation between them
could not be one of mutual Conjunction; as this latter relation
is invariably concomitant with ' separate existence/ For this
reason in the case of transitory substances, 'separate movement1
cannot be regarded as constituting ' separate existence/ As
for the eternal substances, in as much as they have no substratum or receptacle, they could never be said, to have any
'separate substratum;1 and their Conjunctions and Disjunctions would only be due to separate movement; and consequently in, their case it is 'separate movement1 that constitutes 'separate existence/ The sense of aU this is that in the case of the
organ of Touch and the Body, though, in the fifst instance,
there is no separate existence, yet when it is found that they
have distiuct substrates, their Conjunction becomes possible ; and
hence it is concluded that in the case of transitory substances,
' separate existence' is in the form of 'having separate substrates,' and not in that of * having separate movement/
With a view to further strengthen the same view, the
author proceeds to show that in the case of the Cloth and the
*a—No. 3 Vol. X X X I . —Marck 1909.

346

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

Yarns (in it)—between which all parties recognise the relationship of Inherence—there is DO possibility of Conjunction and
Disjunction, even though they are incapable of ' separate morement'; and the sole reason for this lies in the fac« of their
not having distinct substrates.
In the case of all-pervading substances, in as much as there
is no ' separate existence/ tfoere can be no Conjunction among
them; uor Disjunction, as this latter always follows from Conjunction ; hence in the case of these there is mere ' continuance
in their own forms/
[Page 161.] The upshot of all this is this: The mere fact of the
Body not moving when the hand moves does not constitute
4
separate existence'; if the two had distinct substrates of their
own, then there might have been 'separate existence'; as a
matter of fact however such is not the case, as the hand is
inherent in the body (and has no distinct substrate).
•,.
All Disjunction is destructible, being momentary in its character.* The author proceeds to show how all the three kinds
of Disjunction—that caused by action, that existing in the cause,
and that existing in the cause and the non-cause—are momentary, being liable to quick destruction:— The limit of all Disjunction lies in the subsequent Conjunction; ax>d as the two
things disjoined become immediately conjoined to some other
things, the Disjunction can have but a momentary existence.
Question: " How do you know that this subsequent Conjunction is the limit of Disjunction ?"
Answer: Disjunction is not like Conjunction. That is
to say, in the case of Conjunction we find that it is destroyed
only by the Disjunction of the two things that have been in
contact; while Disjunction is destroyed by the Conjunction, not
only 61 the two things disjoined between themselves, but of
these things with other things also. For instance, the Disjunction of a man form the tree at its root is destroyed by his
Conjunction with that particular point of the tree, and also by

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILAKITIES,

347

his contact with another part of it. And thus it becomes established that Disjunction has its limit in the subsequent
Conjunction; all the more so as the action, that brought
about the Disjunction, does not cease until it has brought its
substratum into contact with another place.
Objections: " Your argument involves the fallacy of
1
'SädhyasamaS in as much as you assert that the Disjunction
ceases by Conjunction."
Reply: In the case of the notion of two things being
'conjoined,' in contact, we find that the idea continues for
sometime (ail the time that the things remain in contact); in
the case of Disjunction on the other hand, we find that-as-soon
as the things concerned have come iuto contact with-another
place, the notion of the two things haying been ' separated'
or ' disjoined * ceases ; and hence_ it is only right to say that
Disjunction ceases with Conjunction.
In some cases Disjunction ceases with the destruction of
its substratum,
Question: " How ?"
Answer: An action originating in one part of the yarn
that forms part of a 'duplicate yarn/ brings about the disjunction of that part from another part of the same yarn,—at that
very time an action appears in the other yarn : and the resulting
disjunction brings about, in the part of the yarn, the destruction
of the cohesive conjunction of the yarn ; and then the action
of one yarn brings about its Disjunction of the other yarn,—
all this constitutes one point of time. Then at the time that
Disjunction brings about the destruction of the Conjunction
of the two yarns,—there- is also the destruction of the conjunction of the parts of the yarn ; and this leads to the destruction of the yarn composed of those parts. And this yarn
having baen destroyed, there follows the destruction of the
•Dtsjunctiou from another yarn* inhering in the former yarn ;
and in this oase we find that the only cause of the destruction

348

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CKAP. VI. SECTION (10).

of the Disjunction is the destruction of the substratum, no
other cause being available.
fPage 162.] The Opponent comes forward again with the
following objections: " Thus then, the destruction of the Disjunction of the yarn is simultaneous with the destruction of
"the 'yarn duplicate.1 The 'subsequent Disjunction '-«-that
"of the mobile yarn fro-m points m space—is brought about by
"such Disjunction as is born of Disjunction, (and this would
" not be possible) because of the absence of its cause, viz i the
<f
Disjunction of the two yarns*
" And when the ' subsequent Disjunction * would not be
" brought about, then there would be no cessation of the
" 'Conjunction of the yarn and Äkä^a/ which acted as an
"obstacle to it; and then there can be no conjunction of it
" with any other poiat in space. Thus then no contrary quality,
"in the shape: of this subsequent Conjunction, being present,
"the Action would continue at other times also, m fact it
u
would continue as k>ng as its substratum would not be
"destroyed, or as some other cause for its cessation would not
"appear, and thus there would be the anomaly that the action
"o£ all eternal substances would be eternal (as the substratum
"of such an action would never cease to. exist).
"Question: 'How so?'
Answer: Whea action appears in the atom compos"log the Wafcer-diad, it brings about its disjunction from
" the other atom ; and at that time there appears an action i»
" the other at am composing the Diad. And henee at the time
" that from the Disjunction of the atoms there follows the des" traction of the cohesive Conjunction of the substance, there
"appears the Disjunction of the atom from the Diad, brought
"about by the action in the atom; and then at the time ween
" there follows from the Disjunction of the Atom and the Diad,
" the destruction of the conjunction of the Atom and the Diad, at
"that very time there follows, from the destruction of the conjunction of the atoms, the destruction of the Diad formed by
a

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

34,9

" that Conjunction; and this Diad having been destroyed, the
"'Disjunction of the atom from the Diad/which iuhered in
"that Diad, would also be destroyed; and thus this Disjunction
'* having ceased to exist, there could not appear its effect, in
"the shape of the Disjunction of the atom from the points in
"space; and thus tha previous Conjunction continuing to exist,
"and there being no possibility of the subsequent Conjunction
*' which would oppose and destroy it, the action inhering in the
"eternal atom would continue for ever.1'
The author offers the following reply to the above: The
disjunction of another part of the yarn <kc. That is to say, as
a rule when au action appears in the cause as containing the
effect, it disjoins its own substratum from another part of the
substance, and not from the points of space &c., specially as the
capability of bringing about Disjunctions from points in space
is invariably concomitant with the non-capability of bringing
about any specific disjunctions. And yet the said action does
bring about the Disjunction of the part in contact with its own
substratum from another part; as then* could be no incongruity
in this. Thus then, when an action is produced in one of the
two yarns composing the 'yarn-duplicate,' it is simultaneous
with the disjunction of that yarn from the other yarn; aud
this action also brings about the disjunction from the part of
the yarn. And this disjunction of the yarn from the part of
the other yarn remains intact (and is not destroyed by the
destruction of this latter yarn, which was the substratum of
its own disjunction from the other yarn); for the simple reason
that even on the destruction of the yarn, its part remains intact, and so does also the other yarn. This is what the author
means by say tug—by the destruction of the substratum it in
only the Disjunction ofth* yarn that is destroyed, while that
of the part of tli&yarn from the other yarn remains intact.
Question : "Yes; buk what then ? "
Answer : Etasmdt dec. The sense of the example is that,
just as from the actioo-born Disjunction of the finger from the

350

PBA£ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

Akaga we have the Disjunction of tbe Body from the Aka$a,
so, in the same manner, from the action-born Disjunction of
the yarn and its part, we have the Disjunction of the yarn from
the Äkäga.
Objection: "It is quite right that from the Disjunction of
the Hand and the Ahäga there follows the Disjunction of the
Body from Jkäga ; but it is not right that this latter Disjunction should follow the Disjunction of the finger from Äkäga; as
the Finger is not the (direct component) cause of the Body.'*
[Page 163- J Reply : If this argument be accepted, then the Hand
also is the direct component of the arm, and not of the Body ;
and as such how could any Disjunction from the Body follow from
Disjunction from the Hand 1 If the Hand be regarded as a component of the Body, on the ground of this latter pervading
equally over all its parts,—then, on the same grounds, the Finger
would also he a component of the Body ; as it is the aggregate
of all the different members, the Hand, the Finger &c, that is
recognised as the " Body."
The Disjunction of the Yam from Äka§a having thus come
about, the previous Conjunction (which was an obstacle to further Conjunctions) having ceased, the action in the Yarn brings
about another Conjuuction, and then ceases.
The author next proceeds to explain another manner in
which Disjunction is destroyed by the destruction of its substratum. Simnitaneously with the Disjunction of the other part
of the Yarn, there appears an action in the disjoined part of
that same Yarn; and then from that Disjunction follows the
destruction ofthat Conjunction of the parts of the Yarn which
constituted the Yarn ; and the action of the Yarn brings about
the Disjunction of that Yarn from another Yarn—all this forming one point of time. After that, from the destruction of the
Conjunction there follows the destruction of the Yarn formed by
that Conjunction; and frbno that there follow simultaneously
the destructions of the Disjunction and the action.
We have seen above that the opponent had brougirt forward an objection baaed upon the <4 anomaly of the eternality

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

351

of the suction inhering in eternal substances." This particular
phrase of the objectiou the author did hot choose to take the
trouble of repudiating, as it was found too absurd for any serious
consideration. As a matter of fact, we find that when an action
appears in the cause as containing the effect, it does not bring
about the Disjunction from the points of space, simultaneously
with the Disjunction from other parts of the substance; and the
reason for this is that the capability of bringing about disjunctions from Akäga <kc.y is not compatible with the capability
of bringing about a disjunction opposed to the cohesive Conjunction of a substance. But an action in the atom, which is in
contact with the Diad, into whose composition that atom does
not enter, does bring about its Disjunction from the points in
space, simultaneously with the disjunction from the Diad ; and
that Disjunction having brought about the cessation of the
previous Conjunction of that atom with ÄJcä$a> there appears
another Conjunction of it with the same; and then the previous actiou in this atom certainly ceases (and thus the action
in the eternal atom need not necessarily be eternal).
It has been explained how, when there is a Conjunction of
homogeneous substances a substance is produced, and then the
substratum having been destroyed, we have the destruction
of the Disjunction and the initial action. The author now
proceeds to show how whet» there is Conjunction of heterogeneous
substances, a substance is not produced, there is a destruction
of the Disjunction, following from the destructions of the Conjunction and the substratum (of the Disjunction.) There being
a Conjunction of the Yarn with tJte shuttle &c., &c. The sense
of this is that, at the very time that the action appears in the
part composing the Yarn, there appears an action in the shuttle;
and then the action of the part of the Yarn brings about its
disjunction from another part of the Yarn; and the action of
the shuttle brings about the disjunction, from AkJga, of the
Yarn whose parts had been thus disjoined ; and then from the

352

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSBYA-CHAP. VI. .SECTION (10.)

disjunction of the part3 of the Yarn there follo-ws the destrue*
tion of the Conjunction of these parts ; and from the disjunction
of the shuttle, follows the disjunction of the yarn from the shuttle
and also that of the shuttle from Afaga. Ana then from the
destruction of the Conjunction of the parts of the Yarn there
follows the destruction of the Yarn ; and another Conjunction
of the shuttle. And thus from this subsequeut Conjunction,
and from the destruction of the substratum (the yarn), there
follows the destruction of the disjunction of the shuttle from
the Yarn.
[Page 164] Text (90): Distance 'and Proximity form the
basis of the notions of'prior' and 'posterior.'
They are of two kinds: (1) Due to space, and (%)
Due to time. Those which are due to space afford
ideas of particular directions ; and those are due
to Time affords ideas of age.
We proceed to explain the production of those due
to space; when two things • exist in the samt
direction (of the seer), tlien the number of Conjunctions with contacts in the case of one thing
would be larger than that in the case of the other;
and then judging from the point occupied by the
seer} we have with regard to the thing wherein
1
distance, ' tvould have its substratum, the notion J
that ' it is further removed from him;' and then \
on the basis of this notion, the contact of tfte thing ?
with the further point in space, produces the f
quality of ' Di Uince! Similarly taking the J
further removed object as the limit, we have Ute \
notion, that ' this is nearer than that,' with re- \
gard to the nearer ohject, which is the substratum !
of * Proximity; and on the basis of this notion^ . •
the contact of the thing with the nearer point in
space produces the quality of 'Proximity' J

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AKD DISSIMILARITIES,

353

Question ; " How do you apply this process to the Distance and Proximity of time t"
Answer; (It is thus:) when tue come across tivo men>
both existing at the present time, though occupying any points in space ; though one of them is
youUiful and another older\-—then we ourselves,
as observers, find in one of them (the latter) such
characteristics as a growing beard, roughness of
the thin, wrinkles and a general looseness of shin ;
\
and tJien taking the younger man as the limit
^(standard of comparison) there arises in us,
with regard to the older person, the notion of the
other being further removed in time ; and on the
basis of this notion, the contact of that person
with the further point in time produces the
Quality of' Distance; and when we take the older
man as tlte standard we have the notions of
his being nearer in time; and on the basis of this
notion, the contact of the person ivith the nearer
point in time produces the quality of 'Proximity'
The destruction of these is due to tlie destructions of
(1) ' Apekshabuddhi' (idea of comparison), (2)
Conjunction aud (3) the Substance. To explain
how it follows from the destruction of (1). When
the quality of * Distance ' has been produced, as
soon as there arises a notion of ' commonality '
(of ' Distance '), the apekshabuddhi becomes liable
to destruction and the idea of the quality of
c
Distance' becomes liable to production from
the notions of the said commonality and its relationships,—these tuo liabilities occurrivq at one
point of time-. Then therercomes the destruction
of the apeicshabuddi, and the production or
appearance of the idea of 'quality*; and from
the destruction of the apck&h'ttntä'dhi there follows
the liability of the quality to destrvction ; aud
from the idea of quality and tt^reiuticnskips

354

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTIOK (10.)
follows the liability of the idea of ' substance' to
production,—all these occupying one point of*
time. Then we have the appearance of the idea of
1
substance* and the destruction of the quality
(of' distance').
Question: " In what way does the destruction of this quality follow from the destruction of Conjunction ?"
Answer: Simultaneously with the apekshdbuddhi there
arises an action in the substratum of the quality
of* Distance'; that action brings about the disjunction of the object from space ;. and from the
apekahibuddhi follows the quality of ' Distance, *
all this occupying one point of time. Then there
arises the idea of * commonality *; then we have
the destruction of the Conjunction, of the object |
and space; and then at the time that there arises |
the notion of the quality, we have the destruction I
of the quality (of' Distance ') following from the 1
destruction of the Conjunction of the object and
space.
Question : " Bow does the destruction of the qualities in }
question follow from the destruction of the I
substance ?"
I
Ana wer; When an action appears in that part of ike j
substance which is the substratum of the quality \
of * Distance* at the very time that this action
bring» about the disjunction of that part from I
other parts of the substance, there appears also
apekshöbuddhi; and at the time that Conjunction
is destroyed by that disjunction, we have ike I
appearance also of ' Distance '; and then from)
the destruction of the Conjunction (of its particles)
there follows the destruction of the substance;
and from the destruction of the substance follows
the destruction of the quality (of * Distance) * in-*
hering in it.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

355

Question: " How does the destruction of the quality follow simultaneously from the destructions <f the
substance wnd the apekshäbuddhi ? "
Answer : When an action appears in that part of the
substance ahich is the substratum of 'Distance,'
at that same time apekshäbuddi is produced;
the action brings about the disjunction of that
part from the other parts; and then we have the
appearance of the quality of ' Distance ;—all
this occupying one point of time. Then, at the
time that we have the destruction of the cohesive
Conjunction of the substance following from the
disjunction of the ,particle there appears the
notion of the commonality (of * Distance'), and
after that from the destruction of Conjunction
follows the destruction of the substance; orad
from the notion of 'commonality' follows the
destruction of apekshäbuddhi,—all this occupying one point of time. And then from the destruction of the substance and the apekshäbuddhi
follows the destruction of the quality of * Distance.'
Question: " How does the destruction of the quality
follow from the destruction of the substance and
Conjunction ?"
Answer ; When the action, produced in that part of the
substance which is the substratum of * Distance,'
brings about the disjunction of that part from
the other parU of the substance, at that same time
there is a simultaneous production of the action
of the mass and the Apekslnbuddhi; and then
at the time that the quality of * Distance ' appears,
we have the destruction of the cohesive Conjunction
of the substance following from the disjunction
of the particles; and the action of the maa$ brings

356

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)
about the disjunction of it from the mass of
space,—all this forming one point of time: and
then, at the time that the idea of 'commonality '
. appears, the mass is destroyed on accovnt of the
destruction of the cohesive conjunction of the
8ubst'ince; and from the destruction of the mct»8
follows destruction of the conjunction of the
mass; and then simultaneously with the notion
of ' quality,' we have the destruction of the quality
of( Distance ' following from the destruction o
the conjunction of the mass of substance from the
mass of space.
Question : " How does the destruction of the quality
follow from the simultaneous destruction of
Conjunction and the apekshäbudhhi t "
Answer: When the quality of * Distance' is produced,
and then an action in the substance wherein that
quality inheres,—then at the time that there
appears the notion of the commonality 'Distance'
the action of the object (wherein ' Distance* inher es ) brings about its disjunction from space ;
and then from the notion of commonality follows
the destruction of apekihäbuddhi; and the disjunction (of the object and space) brings about
the destruction of the conjunction of space and
the object—all this forming one point of time.
Then from the destruction of the Conjunction
and ape'lcsfuLhuddhi follows the destruction of
the quality of * Distance.1

[Page 167-1 Question ; How does the destruction of the quality
follow from the simultaneous destruction of its
three kinds of causes—the material, the non*
material and the efficient t"
Answer: When apekshabuddhi appears, there follows

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

357

action in a part of the mass; and then at the
time that the action brings about the disjunction
of that part from another part, avd we have the
appearance of apeksfoibvddhi and the quality
of l Distance,'—at that same time there is an
action in the mass ; and then the disjunction of
the parts brings about the destruction of the cohesive conjunction of the mass ; and the action of
the mass brings about the disjunction of mass
and space, and also the notion of the commonality,—all this forming one point of time. Then
the destruction of Conjunction brings about the
destruction of the mass; and the disjunction
brings about the destruction of the conjunction
between space and the muss; and from the notion
of commonality follows the destruction of apekshäbuddhi,—and thus have we the destruction of the
quality of' Distance * following from the simultaneous destruction of its three causes, material,
non-material and efficient
Commentary:
* Distance ' forms the basis of the use of the word * Distant/
as also of the idea of* distance ;' and so also with * Proximity.'
The effects of the two are mentioned as evidences of their
existence. Though Äkäca and the conjunction of jkäca with
the throat, &c, are the cause of the nse (utterance) of the words
* distant' and ' near,'—and so also the contact of the soul with
the miiid is the cause of the idea,—yet the existence of causes
other than these is indicated by their peculiarities. That is
to say, the causes meutioued are common to all utterance,
and ail idea, hence for the particular utterance of the words
question, and &lso for the particular ideas of them, there must
be more specified causes, as without special causes no special
effects would be possible.

358

PRA^ASTÄPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CH A.P, VI. SECTION (10.)

The two qualities are put together, because they are dependent upon each other; they are relative qualities.
They are each of two kinds, due to Time and Space.
The latter is due to the coutact, of the mass of substance with
particular points in Space, aud the former to the contact of
the mass with points in Time. These differences are evidenced
by the effects they bring about. The ' Distance ' due to space
produces ideas of distance in space, and the ' Proximity'
produces those of nearness in space ; and similarly * Distance'
and ' Proximity' due to Time give rise to ideas of distance
and proximity in time.
[Page 168] The author proceeds to explain the process of the
origination of the quality of * Distance' due to Space.
There is no idea of ' distant' or ' near' when the two
things are on two different sides of the person ; hence the author
says—'existing on the same side*—meaning that both of them
should be either to the east of him or to the west. In such
cases we find that one person is in contact with one point of the
earth, this latter is in contact with another point; and that with
another ; and so on and on, till one of the objects is reached ;
and so on to the other. Thus then, the number of such
contacts with reference to the latter object being more than
that of those with regard to the other, when we take the
nearer object as the standard, tjiere arises in our mind, an idea
of remoteness with reference to the object in regard to which
the uumber of contacts is greater; and it is this object which
is to be the substratum of the quality of ' Distance' to be
produced later. And, on the basis of this idea of remoteness (as
frhe efficient cause), there arises the quality of' Distance/ in
the object which is its ' material' cause, out of the non-material
cause in the shape of the Conjunction with the point in apace
which has the larger Dumber of the aforesaid contacts. And
when we take for the standard the object remote from the
observer, the number of contacts with regard whereto is greater,

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

359

thea there arises the idea of 'nearness' with regard to the
object in connection with which the number of contacts is
smaller; and on the basis of nhis idea of nearness as the efficient
cause, there arise, from the non-material cause in the shape of
the conjunction with the poiut iu space in connection wherewith the number of contacts is smaller, the quality of ' Proximity ' in its material cause, the object which is nearer to the
observer.
Objection: " The notions of nearness and remoteness being
relative, the one depending upon the other, there would be a
negation of both/1
Reply: Not so; because we do not admit of any such
necessary rölativity, as that the uotion of one thing as remote
is always preceded by that of another as T\ear, or vice versa ;
what happens is that the notion of remoteness arises on the
ascertainment of the fact of the number of place-contacts being
greater than in the case of another object; and similarly the
notion of nearness arises on the ascertainment ot the fact of
the number of place-contacts being smaller than in the case
of another object; and thus there is no actual interdependence
between the two notions.
The production of the two qualities due to Space having
been explained, the author proceeds to describe that of those
due to Time. Of two things existing at the present time &&
If one or both of the objects did not exist at the time, no * Distance ' or * Proximity' would be possible; and hence this
specification. Occupying any points in space,—i. e. existing
either oa the same side or on different sides of the observer.
When two persons, one young and another old, are, under*
the above conditions, observed, and in one of them are found
such marks as the growing beard, (fee., which are indicative
of grearter extent of time,—the observer taking for his standard
the man in whom the abseuce of these marks indicates the fact
of his having passed through, a lesser extent of time, has the

360

PIU9ASTAPÄDA 3HÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

notion of remoteness of time with regard to the person with
the beard, &c, and on the basis of this notion (as the efficient
cause), from the non-material cause in the shape of the conjunction with the point in time which has been in coutact with a
larger number of the revolutions of the sun, there arises the
quality of ' Distance/ in that older man who is thus the material
cause. Similarly taking the older man as the standard, there
arises the notion of nearness with regard to the younger person;
and on the basis of this notion, from the non-material cause in
the shape of the conjunction wich the point of time, which has
been in contact with a lesser number of the sun's revolutions,
there arises the quality of { Proximity' in tha younger person,
who is its material cause.
The greater or less number of contacts with the points of
time, in the older and the younger person, is with reference to
the series of changes that their bodies are .undergoing every
moment; and not with reference to them* as individual personalities ; as the personalities are undergoing changes every
moment, and as such could not be regarded as having any
contact; with more than one point of time
Anything that is brought about by a cause must be liable
to destruction; and there could be no destruction without a
cause; hence the author proceeds to describe t^e cause of the
destruction of the qualities of ' Distance * and ' Proximity.*—
The destruction of these follows from the following seven
causes— 1) the destruction of ap^kshabuddhi, (2) the destruction of conjunction, (3) the destruction of the.substances, (4)
the destruction of the substance and apekshdbuddhi, (5) the
destruction of the substance and conjunction (6) the destruction of Conjunction and apdkkshäbudhhi and (7) the destruction
of apdlcshabiLddhi, conjunction and substance.
(1) To explain the destruction of 'Distance' and 'Proximity*
due to (1). ' Distance * having been produced &c. ID 'tatah'
the affix *tasilt is used in the seose of the Locative. At this

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES,

361

time the apScshdbuddhi becomes * liable to destruction'—
i. e. comes into touch with its destructive cause. The notion of
the quality of 'Distance' aries from the community of 'distance/ the cognition of this commonality, and the relationship of
the quality of ' distance,'-^ail this making up one point of
time. The notion of the commonality of ' distance' is the
cause of the destruction of Apekshdbuddhi, and also of the
production of the notioti of ' quality'; and henoe it is that as soon
as it is produced the apekshdbuddhi becomes liable to. destruction; then at the moment we have the destruction of apekshahuddiki, and also» the production of the notion of 'quality'*;aad
from this destruction of apekshdbuddhi the quality becomes
liable to destruction. From the quality, the cognition of the
qualityxand its relationships^ the notion of substances 4Vex3©me$
liable to production, and this constitutes one point of time. Tae
destruction of ap&shdbuddhi is the cause ol the destruction, of
the quality; and the cognition of Quality ' is the cause of the
cognition of 'substance.* The destruction of apekshdbuddhi
and the production of the cognition of ' quality ' are simultaneous;fchen.cethe destructibility of quality and the producibility of the conjunction of substance would, also be simultaneous ; and then there is the production of the notion of tjhe
substances as qualified by the quality of 'Distance,' aud the
destruction of the quality itself.
(2) The destruction due to the destruction of Conjunction
is next described:—.Simultaneously with the apekdiäbuddhi,
Ihere appears, an action, in the object wherein the quality of
'distance' inheres; and at the next moment, that action Urttigs
about the disjunction of space and that object; and then there
appears the apekshdbuddhi aud the quality of ' distance,1—this
occupying one point of time. This quality having been thus
produced, we have the appearance ol the notion of the commonality of Distance;' and from the aforesaid disjunction there
follows the destruction of the Conjunction of Space and the
object:—all this occupying one paint of time. Heuce at the
27

~

362

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

time that there appears the notion of 'quality ' from the notion
of * commonality/ at that same time we have the destruction of
the quality of * Distance' following from the destruction of the
CODJUaction of spice an-1 the object, and not from aptks/iäbuddhi) as this latter also is destroyed at that very time.
(3) The destruction of the qualities by the destruction of
the substance is next described:—The ' substance ' or * object' is
the substratum of the forthcoming quality of' Distance;' whan
in a part of this there arises an action, which brings about its
disjunction from another part,—at that same time there appears
ap4kshdbuddhi; and at the time that the disjunction brings
about the destruction of the cohesive conjunction of the object,
the apteshzbuddhi brings about the quality of ' Distance ;*
and then from the destruction of Conjunction we have the des*
truction of the object; and from that the destruction of the quality
inhering in it; and that same time we have the destruction of
apekshäbuddhh following from the notion of the commonality
of ' Distance'; the destruction of the substratum (i. e. the object)
brings about the destructiou of the unijunction of Space and
the object; and hence these two cannot be the cause of the
cUiMJrucrioo of the quality in question ; as they are concomitant:
ami coeval with it.
(4) The destruction of the substance and aptkehabuddhi
is accepted the cause of tbe destruction of the quality of
' Distance ;' as each of these has been found to bring about its
destruction elsewhere, and in the particular case cited, as we
cannot very well determine to which one of the two the des«
truction is due, we attribute it to bvth.
[Page 171] (5) In this case the destruction of apJkshäbuddlä
canuot be regarded as the cause ; as it is only at that very time
thtt it is possible for its destruction to be brought about by
the notion of' commonality/
(6) As at this time the substance is not destroyed, its des«
tmctien cannot be regarded as the cause.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

363

(7) The substance is the c material' cause; the Conjunction is tbe ' non-material' cause, and the aptäshäbuddki is the
^ efficient' cause.* All the process herein mentioned come
about simultaneously -because of the simultaneity of the causal
operation that brings them about. And thus it is that the
destruction of the three causes brings about the destruction of
tbe quality of { Distance.1
All that has beea «aid with regacd to the destruction of
' Distance' applies equally to the case of the destruction of the
quality of' Proximity ' also.
Text (SI) :~The words* huddki; * upaltbdki* 'jndna 'and
'pratyaya * are synonymous.
Commentary.
It has been sfoown above that • (dista-noe * and ' proximity '
are *bom of buddki^ and the author now proceeds to consider
wbait this buddki is.
i
On this paint the theory of the Sänkhyas is as lollows : A
modification of Pradkdna is the inner organ called * Mahat *
another -name for «/hieb is('CJdUa'; and this same is also
•cttlleti ' Snddhi" (1). Through th« sense-organs the Buddhi
iComes into contact watk, a«d is affected by, the «xternal
•obfeot:; and thereby it eomes to have a peculiar 'function,'
which, taking the form of that same object, aad being based
•up©a the ^tribute of sattva, becomes knawa as 'Jndna' (2).
The faculty ef consciousne.-is, reflected ia the buddki that lias
become affected by the form of tke object thus approached by
the sense-organ, comes to imitate the aforesaid ' function' of
.L; and this imitation comes to be known as ' ttpalabdhi,
3). Says the 'revered Patanjali (the sentence
actually occurs in the Yoffabfaishya of Vyam, *nd aot in the
8utra8 of Putanjall)z 4t The faculty of tke bhaktri, tbe enj}eyect tlw conscioas agent, is taodifyiag, ^ntraasfeiable and
• The commeotary has a long extract from the text here.

364

PRA(?ASTA.PÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP, Vt SECTION (10,)

appear» as if transferred in the modifying- object, Mid comes
to perceive or cognise itä functioning." In this passage, the ,
c
faculty of bhoktri ' is none other than the Self; the * modifying
object' is the principle of buddhi -r and 'transferred' is reflected; and ' comes to perceive its functioning' means that being reflect- 1
ed in buddlti, it becomes a mere shadow cast iu buddhi, aud there- \
by comes to imitate its functioning ; and the objectives of buddld, |
in the forms of pleasure or pain, constitutes what is called 1
* pr&tyaya' (4). Says the same author : " Tlie purusha, though i
pure, comes to- perceive the pratyaya belonging to th« buddhi ;
and while perceiving it, he appears to be identified with it,
though in reality he is wholly distinct from it."
1
[Page 172 I With a view to deny this Sankhya theory, (in j
which distinction is made between buddhi, upalabdhi^ndnai
and pratyayt») the author has said : The words Buddhi dec, The J
sense is-thafc ' Biidcffii1 is nothing but synonymous with the other
words mentioued. The process of cognition put forward by the
Sänkkya is denied &r the sinapie reason that no such process is .
ever perceived. That which is in keeping with the acceptance J
and rxfjcting-ot the ol>ject, and which, in this,.appears to have the J
character of acquisition a-nd expenditure, is one only (and this,
is\ Buddhi); and there-is another (Self) i. e. the substratum of"
this buddhi ;it is this latter ou whom- which there appear activity
or cessation from activity, in accorda«ce with the character of
the buddhi appearing therein-. Both- these entities are cognised
by all men,, no other process is ever know» to- take place. As*
regards the 'function' of buddhi postulated by the Sdnkhyat.WQ
ask—I:* this ' function' somethiog disfainet from bivddhi, or absolutely identical wiihit? Distinct fror» buddhi it cannot be,
because* it wfoeld that there is an absolute identity between the
'function' and that wherein the function appears. If however
ittbe absolutely identical with it,, then, in as much ao buddhi is
one only, its functions too, bearing the forms of: objects, could not
but be one only; and then any idea, of three, or ' four' &c, with
regard to- the 'function' would be absolutely impossible ; specially

QUALITIES j SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

365

as there could be no cognition of any distinct forms among them;
and also because what ou. the puruaha cognises is only that form
which is imprinted on buddhi] as has been declared : ** pnrusha
is the counter-cogniser of buddhi.' On the other hand, the number of ' functions' being many, buddhi also vrould become many ;
and this would be opposed to the idea of its singleness. These
and many other such like objections against ihe Sänkhya theory
may be put forward.
Text (9%)'fr~-Buddhi has various forms, as objects are
endless% and it appertains to each individual
object.
Commentary.
The author proceeds to point out the various kinds of
buddki, and shows the reason for its endless varieties. The
clause * and it appertains etc.' has been added in order to shov?
the reason why the endlessness of objects leads to the endlessness of buddhic forms. The meaning is that our * buddhis' are
found to appertain to, and be restricted to, each individual olject
of cognition : and the number of objects is endless ; consequently the corresponding buddhis too must be endless. Though
there may be cases where we have a single cognition with regard to many objects, yet, even in such cases the cognition is
restricted to the objects cognised, and as such it cannot but be
regarded as distinct from the cognition of objects other than
these; aud hence even these instances do not vitiate our theory
of the number of buddhis being many.
Text (93):—Though there are many kinds of buddhi, yet
briefly it is of tioo hinds, in the form of vidyä
< knoivledge' and avidyd 'non-kwwledye' ov
1
Ignorance.' 0/these avidyä is of four kinds, in
the shape of (1) sancdya, ' doubt' (i) vipxryaya
' misconception.* (3) anadhyavasäya, * indefinite
or indistinct cognition and (4) svapna * dream.'

306

PKACASTAPÄDA BHÄ8HYA—CHAP. TI. SECTION (10v)

Commentary«
Though there are as many buddkis as there are objects it*
the world, yet it may briefly be said to be of two kinds. Vidyä
or knowledge is a cognition of the nature of a definite idea free
from all doubts and discrepancies (lite ally, not rejected as
false) ; and avidyd is of the opposite character. As on the present occasion the author has got only to show the two kinds of
buddhi, he proceeds to describe avidyd first though it was the
last to be mentioned.
This avidyä is of four kinds, lu the forms of Doubt &c.
(Page 173.) Objection : " It is not quite right to limit the mimbfer to four only; as we have a well-known form oiavidya in the
form of tarkajnäna, 'suppositional or argumentative cognition
or idea/ appearing between Doubt and Certain cognition. For
instance, some people hold that the Self is liable to production
while others hold that it is not producible; and between these
two contradictory views, there arises the doubt as to whether
the Self is liable to production, or uot; and then there comes in
a cognition in the argumentative form in some such way as
this—if the Self were liable to production, then it could not be
subject to the cycle o( births and rebirth4*, which consists in the
coTiaection and disconnection of the Self with many bodies, one
after uhe other; nor would it bö capable of final deliverance from
that cycle ; while, on the other hand«. if it were not liable to
production, then being the one cogniser it would* be open 'to
the cycle o( births and also capable of final deliverance ; and
hence the Self cannot but be regarded as incapable of production. As for the purpose to be served by such suppositional
cognition, it is none other than the knowledge of truth ; because
the premiss that leads to the true conclusion is rendered as much
futile by a doubt to the contrary as by a distinct contradictory
cognition ; for the simple reason that no object has two forms
(aa appear in all doubts). This has been thus declared by the revered Bhatta (KumäriJa): ' So long as there is even the hun-

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

367

dredth part o£ suspicion with regard to the truthfulness of the
contrary proposition, how Gan there be any conclusive strength in
that premiss V Thus then having, by the previous argument,
set aside the producihiiity of the Self, and having ascertained its
eon-pro iucibiiity, when the person comes to ponder over the
subject, he finds the course of inference free from ail contravening agencies; and it is then that the inferential process becomes
x
duly operative. Thus then Tdrkt or argumentation leads to
the knowledge of truth, through the due pondering over of the
nature of things concerned ; and as for the means of knowledge
its end is served only by the aid of the argumentation which
embodies the procedure leading to the final result in the shape
of tke knowledge, in Which the means of knowledge comes in
as the means; as an axe even though extremely sharp-edged, is
not capable of cutting a woo J, when held strongly in the hand,
of a person not wishing to cut by it; as has been well said—
'there is no instrument, either in the case of ordinary actions
or in that of vedic ones, which does not stand in need of the
help accorded by the procedure.1 Then agaiu, if Argumentation be not admitted to exist, then it would be equally proper
to reject * prasanga'—which consists in the bringing about of
something undesirable for the opposing disputant; as in reality,
this too does not differ in nature from Tsirhi or Argumentation.
And yet the Vatseshikas also admit of Prasanga, when they
assert that Prasanga is not a proper premiss or hetu, because it
is open to the fallacies of Ägrayäsiddhi and the like.
To the above we make the following reply : what is this
Tarka ? Does it consist of the cognition of the negation of the
opponent's proposition ? or of the likelihood of one's own pro«
position ? In the former case, it would be of the nature of true
cognition (and as such not a fifth mind of Avidyd); because if
the cognition that, ' if the cogniser were transient then there
would be no possibility of the metempsychosis or deliverance/
were not of the nature of ' true cognition/ then it would not
establish the negation of the opponent's view ;as any cognition

368

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION" (10.)

that is not itself true cannot serve any purpose ; and so in this
case it would be wholly imperative ; as there would not be any discrimination of the nature of things. If however the negation
of the opponent's view be regarded to be established by it, thea
it cannot but be 'true cognition'; and as such would come
under one of the kinds of ' true cognition,' in the form of * sense- I
perception ' and the rest; as apart from these there is nothing J
that can bring about any conviction. All this will have to be
admitted by you, however much against your wish it may be. J
As for Prasanga, it consists in the putting forward of a con«
tradiction involved (in the opponent's proposition); and this is
nothing else save the bringing up of an authoritative proof»,
contrary to that view. Then we ask—what is Taika save this
contrary proof, and the words giving expression to this proof?
[Page 174] If, on the other hand, Tarka be held to consist itti
the putting forward of the likelihood of one's own view of the
case, then,—we ask, what would be the cause of the production^
or appearance of this 1 A proof supporting one's own view cannot
be this cause, as no such proof is operative at the time ; for if
the proof were to operate after the nature of things has been'
duly discriminated by means of Tarka,—and then if that samel
proof were to be the cause of this Taika,—we would have a
distinct case of mutual inter-dependence.
g
Objection: "When the negation of the opponent's view I
has been cognised, then there appears the cognition of t h e |
likelihood of one's own view ; and as such the former cognition^
may well be regarded as the cause of the latter."
\
Reply: In that case, this would be nothing more or kssj
than an inference based upon the negation of the opponent's!
view ; as between two contradictions, the negation or absence!
of one is iu variably concomraitant with the presence of another.
Objection; "It «vould have been so if we had a definite:
cognition of the Self having any one of the two characters ; as it?
is however, there is no definite cognition; nor is it of the nature

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

36 9

of a Doubt; as it does not parfcake of both possibilities ; hence
having moved one step forward from Doubt, and yet not having reached the stage of Definite Cognition, the i<lea of likelihood musfc be accepted as something wholly distinct from either;
it is for this reason that we find people sayiug—' thus do I
argue or think.'"
Reply: It is not so, because wherever, on account of
natural possibilities, thefe is a definite cognition of the negation
of the opponent's-view, we have proof of one or other of the two
. contending views ; where however we have a notion of the
likelihood of the opposite view, there is no proof or authority
for the other view. When the intelligent person, having this
concomitance in view, comes to recognise the negation of the
opposite view, he is led to think that the Self is non-producil»le;
and then he comes to recognise the natural possibilities of
the thing concerned (i. e., the Self) as the proof of that idea of
his ; and this is nothing but a case of inference. Thus then, the
recognition of the natural possibilities of tilings aiding the process of the proof, it comes to be regarded as the cause of the
operation of that proof; if it were not so, then, the cognitions of
mere likelihood would be absolutely useless ; as uot being of
the nature of the definite cognition, it could not aid either in
any accomplishment or in any perception ; and as for the discrimination of the nature of the tiling, it is accomplished by
the negativing proof which proves the negation of the opposite
. view.
Others hold that Tarka Is only one kind of Doubt*; aa
in that also there is no certain or definite cognition.
Text (94) : As for Dovbt,—when two objects possessed
of well-known di&tinct specific characteristics,
are seen, and we perceive only the similarities
between them, then we recall to our mind the peculiarities of the objects; and from this cause, and

BHÄSHYA--CHAP. IV. SBCTION (10.)
also by reason, of a certain adharma, there arises
in our mind a pondering, in (he form of' whether
it is this or that'; awl it is this pondering that
constitutes SancayaJ Doubt! II-i-17-20.
It is of two kinds, internal and exteral. Where, an astrologer mad* certain predictions from certain
'Circumstances, which turned out to be true in
one case, but false in another,—if this same |
person makes for the third time similar predictions from similar conditions, with regard to
•pasty present and future events, there arises in his
mind a doubt as to whether his predictions
would turn out true or false; and this is an example of Internal Doubt External Doubt is of two
k'nds,as pertaining to perceptible and imperceptible objects. In the case of two imperceptible objects *
tee find that when toe comeacross a' mark' common
to botK.af them, we remember their peculiarities, \
und then from a certain adharma there arises
a Doubt; e. g, when in a forest we see the horns
-only, we doubt whether the animal seen is a cow
or ot gavaya. In the case of two perceptible
objects, like the post and the man, when we perceive only the tallness that is common to both, ]
und do not notice the crookedness and other marks}
peculiar to each, there is no irianifestation (in \
our mind) of the class * post * or * man'; and
then when we come to remember the peculiarities
of each, the Self has its conviction swinging from j
the one to the oilier, and falls into a doubt as to
whether the object seen is a post or a man.
Commentary.
The particle ' tdvat' is added in order to denote the sequential order of the subject taken up for consideration; the mean*

^

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

371

ing *ieing that we now proceed to describe Doubt. The 'two
objects *—i. e., the post and the man—having various such distinctive features as are well-known from before, such i. e. as the
presence of crookedness and cavities,—having only their similarity—i. e., the qualities common to both—perceived, ani then
there appearing a remembrauce of the said well-known distiuctive features,—and from a certain adharma, there arises a doubt
&c. &c, which while touching both the man and the post doe«
not touch anyone of them definitely ; and this cognition partaking ofiwo contradictory objects is what is called 'j&anpaya'
or * Doubt.'
From the perception of mere, similarity.—The addition
of the word * mere' indicates the nou-apprehension of the distinctive features; the word ' dar^atvi * here means apprehension and not direct sense-perception; as even inferential cognitions or apprehensions are fouud to give rise to ^doubts. The
* cognition of similarity' implies the conguition of one object
wherein the similarity exists; as in the absence of the cognition
of the object, th e could be no cognition of the similarity belonging to it. The Doubt too pertains to the object and not to mere
similarity, which latter is distinctly and definitely recognised; aud
with regard to which thus there can be no doubt The word
' similarity' indicates only the possession of common properties ;
and it is not something inhering in many objects; because
with regard to the single object, Self, we have a doubt as to
whether it is subtile and small or large,—the doubt being <?ue
to the face of the nontouchability (which is found in the
Self) being found in the extensive Äkäca as well aa in the
subtile and small internal organ.
The upsbo^of the whole thus is this:—When a person
perceives in any object a certain property that is common to it
with another object,—and by some reason or other fails to
perceive the distinctive feature of th&t object,—and then remembers the two objects as perceived on some former occasion,

372

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHY A—CHAP. VI. SUCTION (10).

j

as possessed of mutually oootradictory properties, and yet ,
does not perceive the likelihood of these properties existing in *
any si ogle object, by reason of their contradictory character,—
nor does he perceive their nonexistence, as he actually perceives |
the common properties concomitant with it,—then, at that *
time he having definitely cognised the object as possessing the i
common properties, there arises in his mind an uncertain
feeling as to that object being possessed or not of its distinc- :»
tive features; and this uncertain feeliug is what we call
'doubt/
Objection: "To say that it is a 'cognition/and yet to;
call it 'uncertain' is a contradiction in terms; as the very J
nature of cognition lies in the fact of its ascertaining the J
object."
I
[Page 176 ] Reply: Not so ; since both are possible. The cog- t
nit ion in question is produced by the apprehension of an object |
qualified by a property in common with another object, aided by the remembrance of the distinctive features of both, which would .h
be contrary to the perception of the particular (common)!
property; and thus pertaining to the object qualified by the J
common property, the cognition cannot definitely ascertain!
which one of the two objects, post and man, it is ; and it is |
for this reason that it is called ' uncertain' ; though still
retainiug the character of cognition. It is a fact of coramou
experience that peculiar accessories bring about peculiar effects ;
as iQ the case of 'recognition/
Doubt is Avldyn,; and this is an undesirable thing ; and^a&;
such an effect of adharma ; this is what is meant by 'adharmat;
Objection : "In a case where after having perceived a
commonality (the common property), the. man remembers a
peculiarity (the distinctive features of the objects),—in asmuck as, on the occasion of this latter remembrance, the
previous perception of the commonality will have been
destroyed, ic could not serve as the cause of Doubt/

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

373;

Reply ; it is not so; ia as much as tile single remembrance of the distinctive peculiarities ot the two- objects is
brought a*boi*t by the impressions of these peculiarities,
awakened simultaneously, there is every chance, at that time, of
the existence of the disappearing cognition of the commonality.
Doubt is of two kinds.—External aud Internal. These
include the five kinds of Doubt put forward by other Vaigesbika
writers,—these five kinds being : (1) due to the- perception of
^omrooa^properties, (2) due to the perception of many
properties, (3j due to contradiction or disagreement, (4) following from the indefinite character of the perception, and
(5) folio wing from the indefinite character of non-perception.
To give an example of Internal Doubt: An astrologer,,
having consulted the positions and motions of the planets
and stars, makes certain calculations as to a certain event
having happened, happening or likely to happen (in the past
present and future); and he finds them true ; on< another
occasion however he finds his deduction from the same causes
turn out false; and then when on, a third occasion he nt&kes
similar predictions from the same causes, he has his doubts as
to whether it would turn out true or not.
The external Doubt is of two kind's—th*t pertaining to
perceptible objects, and that to imperceptible oues &c. &?c.
As instance of the latter kind we have the case where on
seeing the horn only &c. &c. &c. la this case the object is
hiddjen from, view behind some large tree like the banya» ;
and its.character is only inferred from, the sight or the horn ;
aud hence the object of Doubt on this case is said to be imperceptible. As au instance of the former kind we have the
well-known case of the post and the-man ; iu which case we
see the object and therein perceive and cognise definitely only
the tallness that is common to the post abd the man. The
distinctive features not perceived are those of crookedness- (in
the case of the post) and the presence of band«, feet Jcc. in

374

PRAgASTAPlDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

the body of the man. The word 'etcsetera,' in the sentence
"there being ao manifestation of the class 'post* &c" is added
to include the class 'man.1 The 'crookedness' &c, are the causes
of the manifestation of tbe class 'post,' and the presence of
'head ' ' hands ' &c. is the causes of the manifestation of tbe
class ' man9. And when these, distinguishing features are not
perceived in the object before the person, the class ' man ' or
* post' is not manifested (i. e. recognised) and then the observer
happening to remember the characteristics of the man and
the post, when he is inclined to conclude that the object before
him is a post, he is met by the characteristics of the man that
present themselves to his mind; and when he wishes to
conclude it to be man he is met by those of the post; and
thus being drawn from the one to the other, he finds his
cognition ' swinging/ * inconstant,' moving from one to the
other. The similarity of the swing lies in the unsettled
character of the conviction, which is in the form—' is this a post
or ajanan.'
Ttxt (95).—Misconception also pertains to objects of
Sense-perception and Inference only. As an im- ]
ti.isH.-ce to ith-regard to 'perceptible objects, we have
the case when of two objects possessed of many
wdl'knoivn qualifications, it so happens that the
•vttA thing is not perceived by the person who
has his sense-organs de>anged by such causes as
bile%-phlegm and wind , and then the impression
on the mind, left by the previous perception of
the thing not before (he observer, comes to effect
ike contact of the Self with the mind; and from
this contact, and also from a certain adharma,
therJ appears an idea of something which the thing
is not; and this idea is a misconception ; e. g.
the idea if ' horse ' with regard to the cow. Even
when there is no actual perception, there is an

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

375

impression or semblance of it; as /or instance
ivc have such notions of perceptions as that when
the clouds have passed off, the sky appears like
the calm ocean; and the night's darkness
appears as dark as a mass of colyrium, dust.
As regard* infaahle objects, tue often find that
vapour is mistaken for smoke, and from that
the existence of fire is inferred; and also the
-—^ sight of the hoi us of the gavaya leads to the
inference that the animal is a coiu. With
regard to the tenets of the Buddha and others
opposed to the Veda, some people have the
idea that they are conducive to actual welfare ;
and this also is an instance of wrong idea, a
misconception. So also are the following—the
notion of ' self' toith tegard to the body, the
organs and the mind ; the idea of eternality
tvith regard to caused things ; the idea of the
appearance of effects in the absence of adequate
muses; the idea of * evil' tvith regard to
persons advising what is really goid for us ;
and the idea of * good ' with regard to these who
counsel evil ways.
Commentary*
[Page 178] After Doubt, the author proceeds to deal with
Misconception. Misconception alsopertaios to objects perceivaud inferred, like Doubt. This declaration is due to the fact
of there being (according to the Vai^eshika) DO third means of
true knowledge.
As for misconception with regard to perceptible objects : —
we find e. g. ia the c-tse of the cow and the horse, of whom
many such peculiarities as the presence of the dewlap aod the
mein respectively, are well known, that we have with regard
to the cow the idea that it is a horse which it is Dot, aod vice
versa; and this is a case of misconception.

376

PRAgASTAPlDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI/SECTION (W.)

Objection: •" When such distinctive featuxes of the-cow
as the class ' cow,' the presence of the dewlap &c., are duly
recognised, there can be no misconception ; for if even after
tl»e due perception oi these a misconceptioa be possible* then
there would be uo end to such misconceptions."
la reply to this the author adds—tlte real thing not being
perceived; i. s.y there is no such definite cognition as that * this
animal with the dewlap &c, that I see is a c&v;' ; and it is faith is reason that we have the notion with regard to a thing, of
something that it rs not. This meaus that bhe cause of raiscouception consists in fche non-perception» of characteristic
properties.
Question : " What is the reason that when the object before
the observer is the cow, what he coguises is the class ' luorse/
an individual whereof is before him, and not the elass *cow ' V*
Answer : The sense-organ, being deranged dec. That is
oo say, the misconception arises only in such persons as. have
their seuse-organs deranged by the disorder of the three
humours of wind, bile and phlegm, —a disorder the power whereof to bring about the percepfciou of something not before the
eyeSj and to obstruct the perception of that \yhichis before the
eyes, has thus been indicated.
Objection: " If it were solely on account of the power of
the derangement that something n,ot before the eyes were to be
perceived, theu everything in the wortd would be perceived
everywhere; as there would be nothing to limit the force of
the derangement."
Reply '• From the contact of themvad and the self,, affect'
ed by the impressions of the previous cognition of the thing
not before the eytn &c Such, a thing, in the case in question
is the horse; this having been seen on some previous occasiou,
the observer has impressions of it on his mind ; and when this
impression affects the coutact of the min,d and the Self at the

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

377

.time in question, there arises the miscouception or mistaken
idea of the horse In the cow. The meaning of ail this is tins :
The sense-organ (eye) in contact with the cow, perceives, not
the 'cow/ but the body as qualified by a similarity with the
cow,—every object having various factors of itself, the eye
perceives only certain factors of it; this cognition of similarity
awakens the impression of the horse that is there in the observer's
mind ; and when the remembrance of the horse has been brought
about, the said impression brings about the cognition of the
horse, by reason of the similarity of the horse in the cow which
is in direct contact with the sense-organ,—this being due to a
certain derangement in the perceiving organ concerned. And
thus it is that everything is not cognised everywhere, the necessary restriction being done by similarity and by previous
impression. It is for this same reason that the teachers of old
have called this misconception * sense-born.' t It could not be
'Sßnse-born/ if it were to take cognizance of the * horse ' only,
which is not before the eyes, and if this cognition wer3 due solely
to the impression ; or if it belonged to a person who had all his
sense-avenues closed. As a matter of fact however, we find that
it takes cognizance of the * horse' in the body of the cow which
is in contact with the fully active eye ; and even then, if
it were not ' sense-born/ what other misconception could be
' sense-bom' 1
[Page |79.] It is for this reason that we hold the case of misconception to be one of Viparüakhyäti, ' the cognition of the
contrary ' ; because one thing appears as what it is not; and
hence even in a case where a misconception arises without any
sorb of objective substratum, it is something not existing which
is cognised in the ' contrary ' form, i. «., as existing. And this
cannot be a case of asatkhyäti, * cognition of the non-existing*;
as the form of the object is always likely to exist, and it is
not possible for the non-existing to be cognised In a case
where we have the misconception appearing in a certain
objective substratum, we have similarity as its cause; while in a
28

378

FRACASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAR VI. SECHOW (10).

case where there is no objective substratum, aad where the
misconception is due solely to mental derangement, there is no»
possibility of any cognition of similarity ; as for instance, when
a man infatuated with love for a woman perceives the semblance of his beloved here, there and everywhere. Impression
is the cause only in cases where the misconception is determinate and concrete; when it is indeterminate and abstract the
cause lies in the derangement of the sense-organ ; as the mi scon*
ceptiou 13 always found to be accompanied by some such derangement ; as for instance, \>hen we have the notion of yellowness in the conchshell
The author proceeds to cite another instance of misconception—Even when there is no sense-p'reeption &c, &ct A mao
desirous of lookng at the sky directs his eyes upwards, and the
light-rays shot out from the eye having gone to a great distau«*
upward become slackened in their speed ; and then beidg
struck by the powerful light-rays from the sun shooting in ua
opposite direction downwards, they are turned back; and
render perceptible the basisless blue quality of the occular orbs;
and theu it is that they produce the cognition that c the sky ia
free from clouds and appears like the calm ^ocean,'— a cognition wherein we have what appears like a sensuous perception
of colour in the sky which is really imperceptible. That the
sense-organ (of vision ) makes the quality of its own orb appear
as inhering in the sky is proved by the peculiar character of tbe
cognition which is found to follow the qualities of the organ.
For instance, a man with the jaundiced yellow eyes sees the
sky as besme red with molten gold ; and the man under the
influence of cold and phlegm having his eyea whitened perceives
it to be like silver. Then again, when a man looks upon the
extreme darkness of night, he perceives what he thinks to be a
mass of collyriura, though in reality there is absolutely nothing
there ; and this, is a case of perceiving as perceptible what is
absolutely imp reeptible.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITCKS AND DISSIMTLAAlTISSk

379

la tiiÄ case of inferable objects aiso^it sometimes happen«
that we mistake for smoke, such things as vapour, rising du«fc
and the like; and from the 'idea of this smoke we often form
the notion of the existence of fire in aj place where there is
no fire at all. Similarly from the seeing of the horn* 0? the
gavaya we infer the existence of the cow. Both these are instaoces of Misconception.
The author proceeds to show that misconceptions also aria«
from the constant study of faise philosophical doctrines—Trayi*
daiyana, &c. The word ' trayi' means the three Vtdas, Rig,
Yajush and Säma, which include also the Atharva Veda;
' dargana' means that whereby the means of attaining heaven
and final deliverance are known. In the philosophical system«
of &äkya, Bhifohu,) Nirgranthafca, SanwLramochaka and the
lik$, which are all opposed to the Vedic phiiosophy,(wefindmany
teachings as to what \s truly good and desirable; and the
notion that these teachings are authoritative is a misconception;
as is shown by the fact of their being accepted by very few
people, of their being deprecated by, and deprecatory of, all
castes and conditions of men, and of their being contrary to all
proper reasoning.
[Page 180.] Similarly, the idea' of Self with regard to the body,
the sense-organs and the mind, is a misconception; because the
real eogniser has been proved to be something wholly distinct from
these; The Mitndnsakas have the misconception of eternality
with regard to the Veda, which is ' caused * or composed (and as
such cannot be eternal). The Lauhayatikas, true disciples of the
Miman8a!ca3, have the misconceptiou that diversities of pleasures
and pain appear without any such cause as Dharma and
Adharma. Then we have such misconceptions as that the
salutary teachings otythe Veda—that ' living beings should not
be killed/ and that' on* daoitld not bear 00 his body dirt, mud
and such other impurities/— are harmful; and that such teachings, as that; ' animal -slaughter is the highest virtue/ and ' the

380

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

bearing of dirt, &c., tends to good,' emanating from Kshapanakas
and Sansäramochakas, are salutary.
In connection with misconception some people (the Praäthäkaras) urge the following objections : " There can be no misconception, as there can be no cause for it; as is evidenced by the
fact of the sense-organs having by their very nature, the character
of briuging about correct cognitions. It is not right to assert that
by reason of derangements the sense-organs often bring »bout
wrong convictions. Because all that a derangement can do is to
destroy the efficiency of the organ ; as for instance, in the case of
the shell & the silver, the disordered eye coming iu contact with
the shell is not able to perceive the shell; and it can, in no case,
perceive the silver which is not present before it: for if it could
do so, then derangements would have to be regarded as having
the power of adding fresh efficiencies (which is absurd). If the
eye were to render perceptible what if not perceptible, then what
would be there to avert the possibility of all meu perceiving all
things. Thee again, the assertion that the 'shell is the substratum
of the idea of silver' contains a self-contradictory conception.
Because that object alon« which appears in an idea is its substratum, and none other; it is silver that can appear in the idea of
silver, and not the shell; and until one has perceived the silver
he cannot mistake the shell for silver ; hence it must be admitted
that in the case in question we have a dual conception : (1) the
idea of 'this' with regard to the piece of shell before the eyes is
a% direct perception, and (2) the idea of ' silver' is produced by
the mere impression of silver awakened by the perception of a
certain degree of similarity between the shell and the silver;
tond-t^Jis there is only a remembrance of silver; and the notion
of * this ' is due to the derangement of the sense-organ."
To the above we make the following reply : If there were
no idea ,o£ silver with regard to the shell, and if it were only a
remembrance of silver, then at the time that a person wanting
silver mistakes the shell for silver, he would not be moved to

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

3$!

take up the shell \ in fact he would move to take the silver that
he might bave seen elsewhere OQ some previous occasion ; as a
remembrance always moves the person to the place where its
original perception had occurred.
Objection: " It is that form of silver which it has in
common with the shell that is perceived by means of the senses,
which do nob perceive the form peculiar to the shell; and what
the remembrance of silver does is to bring up to the mind the
idea of'mere silver, being as it is, devoid of any notion of
* that,'—this silver being unconnected with any definite point
in space ; and there being a similarity between the perceived
shell and the remembered silver, as also between the perception
and the remembrance;—and there being no apprehension of
the difference between them,—the observer fails to discriminate
and (being desirous of obtaining silver; moves up to theshell,
and comes to form a notion of identity between the shell and
the silver, in the form ' this is silver/ "
Reply : This is not right; as there is no perception of nondiscrimination either. It is the non-perception of the distinction from silver.in the shell, and not the perception of similarity,
that serves to urge the seeker after silver to move towards the
shell; and what leads him to desist from it is the perception of
the difference between the two. An d as in accordance with your
view, there would be the perception of neither difference nor nondifference, he could not move either towards, or away from» the
object before him ; and there would be no particular reason for
his moving towards it. And thus there would be no co-extensiveness between the two, as there would be every likelihood of
the non-perception of non-difference, which would be aground for
the diversity of substrates. And then there would be no possibility of any such subsequent} preclusive conception as that * this
is not silver,' as the difference between the silver and the shell
is not cognised ; nor is there any perception of absolute identity
between them, which would be set aside by the preclusive
conceptioa.

382

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄ8HYA—CHAR VI. SECTION (10.)

Objection : " The negation is of the use of the shell as silver,
a use that Is made possible by the non-perception of the difference beCvveeo the two."
[Page 181] Reply: Not so ; because the non-usage of shell as
silver would be possible also by reason of the no »-perception of
an identity between them. As a matter of fact, we find that the
seeker for silver is found to move towards the shell; and there
is also the notion of the co-extensiveness (or identity) between
the two—iu the form ' this is silver ;' there is also a negativing
conviction to the effect that the thing cognised as ' this ' has not
got the character of silver : and from this we infer that the
notion of silver in the shell was brought about l»y the eye in
contact with the shell, led to the mistake by a derangement in
it,—helped also by an impression of silver, and an apparent
similarity between the shell and the silver.
It has been argued above that the assertion of the idea of
silver having the sheJl for its substratum involves a self-contradiction. But there is not much in this argument; as it is
the piece of shell, occupying a dtfinite position and qualified by
a certain degree of brightness, that appears as ' this/ What is
meant by a thing being the substratum of an idea is that it is
that which will be acquired or rejected by the person having
that idea, and this, in the case in question, is possible only in
regard to the shell; and as for one who, not perceiving the
difference of the shell from silver, desires to use the former for
the latter, he too will admit of the existence of misconception;
as misconception is nothing else except the using of one thing
as something which it is not.
Then again, it has been urged that derangements only
serve to deprive the organ of certain powers. But there is not
much in this argument either; because we fiod that the
hnmoars of the body when affected by xhe disorders of wind,
bile and phlegm, bring about fresh diseases.

QUALITIES i SIMILARITIES ANO DISSIMILARITIES.

383

As for the cbance of all men kuowiog all thing», this contingency is set aside by the restrictioa upon and limitation of
the potentialities of derangements.
Then again, the mere fact of a cognition not tallying with
the object cannot make it absolutely untrustworthy aud false ;
as when we do not find its negativing cause in the shape of
derangements, we conclude that there is no negativing cause ;
and as—a^misconception is always followed by a negativing
cause, the absence of the latter leads us to conclude that the
cognition is not a misconception, and to believe it to be true.
If misconception be not admitted, then, how would you
account for the cognition of two moons ?
The opponent says: " In this case what happens is that the
Hghtraya from the eye disarranged and diverted on account of
the disorder, move out of it separately, and falling upon the moon,
produce two perceptions; and hence what we cognise is the
quality of the cognition ; i. e. we have two cognitions of the same
mooQ, and not the single cognition of two moons"
Reply: This cannot be; because a property (duality) of
the cognition could not be perceived by means of the eye. If it
be argued that' the quality of cognition perceived as belonging
to the cognised object, can be so perceived only by means of the
organ that perceives the object,'—then the existence of misconception becomes admitted ; as in that ca.se the quality of
one thing would be cognised as belonging to another; and so we
shall desist from further angering the learned protriya Irakmana.8 (the MimamakaSy holding the opposite view).
Some people (the Vedantis) hold that in the case in question* what is perceived, in the cognition of silver, is at real
beyond the pale cf the physical; and oa this ground
deny that there b any misconception. But fo* those people
the cognition could not give rise to any activity; aa a super«
physical object is never found to give rise to any effective
action.

384

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-GHAP. IV. SECTION (10.)

[Page 182-] Text {96): Anadhyavasäya, f [ndefinitejor Indistinct cognition \ also appears in regard to perceptible and inferable objects. As regards percep~
tible objects, whether well-knoxon or not, we find a
mere idea appearing in the form ' what may
this be? due eithtr to the absent-mindedness of
the observer, or to the fact of his desiring to know
(further details) with regard to it; and this idea
is what we call 'indefinite cognition/ As
for instance, a Vähika (an inhabitant of the
Dahsha country) has such a cognition with regard to the jack fruit. In this case there appear
definite cognitions with regard to tlie fact of the
object being—(1) an entity, (#) a substance,
(3) a modification of Earth, (4) a tree, (5) having '
a distinct colour, (6) and branches. As for the .
generic character of the * jack fruit* that too-including all jack fruit trees, and excluding thß :
mango and other trees, is distinctly perceptible; J
but it is only the particular name * jack fruit ' |
which is not duly recognised, in the absence of a j
teaching to that effect (from an older person). As 1
regards inferable objects, the inhabitants of the ':l
' Nänkda' continent, on seeing the dewlap, have \
an indefinite cognition as to what the animal
having the dewlap may be.

Commentary.

\

The word * also * is meant to indicate that like Misconception, Indefinite Cognition also appears with regard to both kinds
of objects. And the word * tävat' means that we shall deal
with inferable objects in due course, and we are considering
perceptible objects for the present. With regard to objects &c,
&c,,—the 'well-known objects,' arc those that arc known from

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES &ND DISSIMILARITIES.

385

beforehand. Witb regard to such object we find that, on account
either of absent-mindedness, or a desire for farther knowledge,
the observer has the idea ' what may this be ?' c g.t when a
well-known king has passed by the road, one has not been able
to observe him, has only an indefinite cognition that' somebody
has passed by this way/ not knowing the character of the particular person. Aa regards objects that are not well-known,
Indefinite Cognitions appears on account of ignorance; e. g., an
inhabitant of the Daksha country has no definite idea of the
'jackfruit tree/ He has many definite cognitions with regard
to it,—such as (1) ' this exists' (2) * this is a substance/ (3) 'this
is a modification of earth/ (4) ' this is a tree/ (5) ' this has such
. a colour/ and (6)* this has branches/ The generic character of
'jack fruit' also he perceives in the abstract (indeterminately) ;
it is only the fact of its bearing the name of 'jack fruit' that
he does not know, until some one mentions it to him; he has
only the idea that it must have a name. And this cognition,
devoid of the idea of the particular name, is what we call,' indefinite Cognition/
[Page 183.] Aa regards inferable objects, it often happens that
an inhabitant of the Närikela continent—where there are no
cows,—who does not known what a ' cow * is, having gone to
another continent, sees the dewlap, and having inferred from certain circumstances that the mass before him is an animal, has no
definite idea as to the particular class or species to which it belongs, and the only idea that he has is the indistinct one—
4
this is some sort of an animal'; and this is '' anadhyavamiya,'
' indistinct cognition/ which expression denotes the negation or
absence of definite distinct cognition.
Objection: " This idea being indefinite is none oiaer
Doubt."
Reply: Not so; because ihe origin as well as the form
of an Indistinct Cognition differs entirely from that of Doubt.
Then again, we have seen that s> doubt arises from the recnem29

~

"

386
PfU^ASTAPADA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (lfr.)
_~
_
J
brance of the. peculiar characters of the two objects; while there'|
is none such in the case of * Indistinct cognition/ which often $
arises from mere absence of a distinct cognition of peculiarities ; and secondly, Doabt wavers between the two extremes,
touching sometimes the one and sometimes the other, which is j
not the Case with Indistinct cognition. Nor is this latter Vidyä; I
;
Q as much as it is not found to give rise to any activity.

Text, (97): When the 8ense-org<£m have ceased to function, and the mind has retired, then there come ]
about eertain mental cognisings through the
sense-organs; and it is these that constitute
" Dream Cognition."
j
Beings tired by their exertions during the dayj
caused by their conscious bodily actionsr retire .;
- at night with a view either to rest or to enable
their food to be digested; and then the connection j
of the self and the internal organ, brought aboutby an effort due to the force of certain unseen^
agencies, causes certain functioning» in the,
mind; and then the mind retires peacefully into
tite heart lohich is the organless region of the
self; and then it is said to have "• retired." The
mind having thus "retired/* the organs of the
wan cease to function. In this state the pro~
cesses of inbreathings and outbreathings going
on profusely, from such causes as, (I) " sleep ?
which is the name of a particular state of contact of the self with the mind and (2) impressions
of previous cognitions,—there appears, through
the sense-organs, a dreams-cognition, resembling
direct sense-cognition, with regard to objects thai
have no real existence.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

387

[Page 184] This dream cognition is of three kinds: (1) Due
to the strength of impressions left by previous
cognitions, (3) Due to the disorders oj bodily
humours, and (3) Due to unseen forces.
(1) A 8 for that due to the strength of impressions, it
often-happens that when a man, having a strong
cfcsire for something and thinking constantly
of that thing, goes off to sleep, that same series
of thoughts and mental images appear again in
the form of sense-cognition.
Iß) A 8 regards that due to the disorders of bodily
humours, we find that a man iv whose constitution, wind%is the predominating humour, or in
whose body wind has become disordered, he often
sees (in a dream) that he is flying in the sky,
and so forth. Similarly a man whose constitution abounds in bile, or whose bile is disordered
feels as if he were entering into the fire, and sees
mountains of gold and such other things. And
one in whom phlegm predominates or is deranged,
sees such things as crossing rivers and oceans*
and mountains of snow and so forth.
(5) That due to unseen forces. Very often there appear
in dreams certain cognitions—of objects previously perceived and also those never perceived
before, those known as well as those that are not
known; and among these there are some, such as
the riding on an elepnant, the obtaining of an
umbrella and such other things—which betoken
the coming of some thing desirable; and these
proceed from previous impressions and Dharma.
Of the opposite kinds are the rubbing of oil and the
riding of asses and camels &e.; and these proceed from previous impressions and Adharma.

388

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

1
jj
Those however that pertain to things absolutely I
unknown, proceed wholly from unseen forces. M
As for "dream-end" cognition, though this also I
appears in one whose sense-organs are inopera^
tive, yet, in as much as in this we have the *•«•
calling of a past cognition, it is only a form
of "remembrance."
These then are the four hinds ofAvidya. {ix 2. 2-8.)
Commentary.

The author proceeds to describe dream-cognition. Th0
sense-organs are said to " cease to function" when they are
not La contact with and apprehending their respective objects;
*' Pralinamanaska"—"the mind retired"—means that the mini
has fully retired within itself. The man in this condition has
through his senses, a certain cognition, which is independent oi
his previous cognition« (and hence not a mere remembrance)]
and of a definite character (hence not of the nature of nirt/i«
halpaka cognition) ; and this is * mental/ proceeding from th«
mind alone; and this cognition is what is called "dream."
He proceeds to show how the mind of man retires, ani
how the sense-organs cease to function : The man during th
day carries on many such bodily actions as going about fror
place to place; and being tired by these be retires at oighj
with a view to rest from the fatigue, or for the purpose c
the proper digestion of the foods and drinks be has taken)
and the effort caused by unseen forces, effecting the contact
of the mind and the self, brings about a series of actions ia
the mind; and on account of this, the mind rests unmoviüj
within the heart, which is the region of the self devoid of the
external organs of perception ; and it is during this condition
that the man is said to be "pralinamanaska" 'withhm
mind retired/ When the mind has thus retired, the sense;
organs oease to operate; for the simple reason that
j
guided by the inner organ (mind,) these organs cannot apprgj

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.
bend their objects. During this 'retired' state of the mind
the process of the inner and outer breathings going on,—from
euch causes as sleep, which i* a particular state of contact of the
miod aod self, and impressions of things perceived before, there
proceeds a dream cognition, which ressemble* direct sense*
cognition with reference to objects that do not exist ;—that is
to say, those that do not exist at that particular time and place.
He proceeds^ to show how Dream Cognition is of three
(1) That lukieh is dtie to the strength of impressions.
When a man who is in love with a woman, or when he is
very angry with his enemy, thinks constantly of his beloved
or his enemy, and while thus thinking goes to sleep, then the
series of thoughts or mental images appear, by the strength
of the impressions left on his mind, in the form of the direct
sense-cognition of some thing directly in oontact with his
organs of perception.
(2) The ' humours of the body * are serum, flesh, fat, marrow
bone and semen ; and these are called ' dhätu' because they
hold or support the body (dharandt); and when these sure deranged by disorders of wind, bile and phlegm, then there
appear certain misconceptions. To explain—a man in whose
constitution wind is the predominating factor, or one ra whom
wind has been much disordered by some cause or ether,
perceives as if he werefloatingin the sky or running about here
and there. One who is of a bilious temperament, or one in whom
bile has been developed abnormally, perceives a» if he were
entering into fire, and sees such things as mountains and orb« of
gold, the solar dise, and so forth. One of phlegmatic temperament, or with his phlegm disordered, feels aß if he were
crossing rivers and oceans, and seeing mountains of snow &c.
(3) Then, there are certain things which «re sot known to
others; other things which the person himself has never
perceived, and which are not known to othWsyof this kind are

390

PKA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

such things as the riding of the elephants, seeing of umbrella andi
the like, a vision of which presages something good ; and thej
dream of these is brought about by impressions and dharma3<
That which is of the coDtrary character,—i. e. which forebodes
evil—such/.t. as the rubbing of oil, the riding of asses and!
camels &c.—are produced by impressions and adharma. Where«!
as with regard to such things as are wholly unknown to the man '
himself as wellas to others,—such f. i. as the eatiog ef the sunf
and the moon and the like—these ideas are produced by un-J
seen forces alone ; as with regard to such things there can be no. J
impressions.
J
Though all dream cognition, proceeding either from the;
strength of impressions, or from the disorders of humours, or
from unseen forces, consists of the false imposition of external,
fopa upon something that is wholly internal,—and as such,|
being the cognition of some thiug as what it is not, it is only aj
particular kind of misconception,—yefc as it occurs only during a
particular condition of the body, it is classed separately.
I
It often happens that a man recalls in dream what he hag I
been dreaming of,—in the form. * I have been dreaming of j
auch and such a thing';—and this being the * end' of the j
preceding * dream/ is called ' dream-end ' cognition : and as \
this also appears in one whose sense-organs have ceased,
so function, people, might take this also as ' dream cognition '
proper ;- hence with a view to set aside this doubt, the author
adds that though this cognition also appears when the senseorgans are not functioning, yet, being only the recalling of a
previous cognition, it is of the nature of * remembrance.'
•%
He sums up the whole by saying—These are the four
hinds of Avidyd.
[Page 188.] Ttet (99): Vidyä also is of four hinds: (1)
Directly sensuous, (ß) Inferential, (3) RecollecUveand (4) Superhuman. (III-i-8; IX-ii-1,6,23).

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

391

Commentary.
The author proceeds to classify Vidyd,' Knowledge.' Not
only Ignorance, but Koowledge also is of four kinds. He mentions ' direct sensuous ' knowledge first, because it is the cause
of ' inferential' knowledge which comes after it; then he mentions ' recollective ' knowledge, because we have remembrances
of only such things as have been previously known either by
the senses or by Inference, The'superhuman ' knowledge is
mentioned at the end of the ordinary forms of knowledge,
because it belongs only to superhuman beings.
Text (99):.. Of these, that which proceeds from the senseorgans is *directly sensuous* The sense-organs
are six—the nose, the tongue, the eye, the skin, the
<ear and the mind.
This knowledge appears with regard to substance and
the other categories. A$ regards substance, it
appears with reference to three forms of it, in the
gi oss form; and proceedsfromsuch causes as the
existence of many parts, the appearance of manifested colour, avd the presence of the contact of
four things, aided by such auxiliaries as dhartna
and the like; in this the knowledge is in the character of ' mere perception of form' From the
contact of the mind as qualified by (1) generalities, (2) specialities, (3) substances, (4») qualities
and (5) action,—there proceeds a ' directly sensuous' knowledge,—/. i., in the form, €ihe (1)
existing, (2) substance, (3) earthy cow, (4) white
and with horns, (5) is moving'
With regard to colour, taste, odour, and touch the
sensuous knoioledge is brought about by means
particular sense-organs, and proceeds from such
causes as—their inherence in composite subatoniitd, peculiarities in the qualities themselves
and the contact with the substrates of these qualities. The knowledge of sound proceeds from

39t

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BäÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)
threefold contact; and inhering in the ear, it is
known by the ear alone. Number, Dimension,
Beparateness, Conjunction, Disjunction, Distance, Proximity, Viscidity, Fluidity, Velocity
and Action are perceived by the eye and the
skin, through their inherence in perceptible
substances. Intellect, Pleasure, Vain, Desire,
Aversion and ft fort are perceived by the contact
of both mind and self. Bhavatva (the character
of * being'), gunatva (the character 'quality')
karma (the character of ' action') and others—
when inhering in cognisable substrates—-are perceived by means of those sense-oryans that perceive
their substrates. This is the case with our ordU
naiy 'sensuous' knowledge.
\
As for persons unlike ourselves—e. g. yogis in the
estdtic condition—there appear precisely true
cognitions of the real forms of such things
their own self as well as the selves of others,;
äkäca, space, time, atoms, wind, mind,—the qualities, actions, generalities and individualities in"
hexing in. these,—and inherence ; and the cognfcM
tion of these is brought about by the mind as aided]
by properties or faculties born of yoga. In thel
case of Yogis out of the ecstastic condition, direct]
Bensu&us knowledge appears with regard to sub*"|
tile, hidden and distant objects, by means of the\
mind through fourfold contact, by the force of\
faculties born of Yoga.
|
With regard to generalities and individualities, the only
Mtans of- direct sensuous knowledge is the ptrA
cfiption o¥ cognition of the merejform; the cognitable* are substance and other categories; the
cogniser is the self; and the* cognition is the
knowledge of substance, etc.
j

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

393

In the appearance of the cognition of generalities and
individualities, the means of direct sensuous cognition consists in mere * dloeana * (contact of the
sense-organ and the object); for I his there is no
other means of knowledge; as it is not in the
form of resultant cognition.
Or, the means of direct sensuous cognition may be defin..... .--•-""" ed as any and every true and undeflnable cognition of all objects, following frqm fourfold contact;
substance and other categories are the cognisables :
the self is the cogniser; and the recognition of the
good pleasant), had (unpleasant) and indifferent
character (of the things perceived) is the cognition.
Commentary.
The author proceeds to explain the definition of ' sensuous
perception '—-The meaning of the definition is that, that which
is produced after reaching the sense-organs is ' sensuous perception '; the peculiar character of its cause also serves to
differentiate a thing from other homogeneous and heterogeneous
things ; and as such serves as its definition. For instance, the
fact of being produced out of the barley-seed serves as a definition of the barley-sprout; by which reason too this latter name
is given to it.
Objection : " In as much as pleasure, pain and impressions
are also produced by the sense-organs, this also won Id be ' sensuous perception* (according to the definition given)/'
Reply; Not so; because the definition occurs in the
section on ' Buddhi '; and is thereby so qualified as not to
extend to pleasure, &c. That is to say, the sense of the definition is that that' cognition * which appears after contact with
sense-organs is ' sensuous perception.' And it is a well-known
fact that pleasure <&c, have not the nature of ' cognition'; and
äs such, how could the definition apply to these ?
Objection: " If such be the cause, then there could be no
prämänya,' • evidential authority/ or * character of means of

394

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI, SECTION (10.)

knowledge/ in the contact (of the sense-organs).
Rep/y: True; such a character is not shown by the
sentence under consideration ; but as a matter of fact such
character of the contact is really meant; as the word * pravidna*
is interpreted as pramiti-karana, * the instrument or means of
true knowledge,' and certainly the contact is auch a means.
As for Doubt and Misconception, these are excluded by
she very fact of the section being one of * \Tidya' (while Doubt
and Misconception are forms of Avidya).
The declaration, * that that which is born of the contact
with the sense-organs is sensuous perception,' tnighc lead some
people to think that it is only the congition bora of the external
organs that is such a perception ; a« it is only these organs
that are ordinarily kaowa as * sense-organs ;' and with a view
to guard against this the author has repeated the word * aksham!
which is thus made to include all sense-organs, internal as well
afl external.
The compound in the word ' pratyakska y is in accordance
with the aütra ' kugatiprädayah ' (Panioi II-ii-18); and the
word literaly meaning * prxtigatam ukskam ' (' that which has
approached the sense-organs ') the word becomes an adjective,
and as such its gender is regulated by the gender of the noun
it qualifies,—and we have auch expressions as ' pratyakskam
jndnam * (neuter), ' pratyakska huddhih' (femiuine), and
1
pratyahahah pratyayah ' (masculine).
In as much as the word * aksha' is known to have many
meanings, the author proceeds to specify the meaning desired
to be conveyed in the preterit context. The word * akaha ' here
it used in the sense of Indriya, ' sense-organs.*
The Sänkhyas speak of eleven sense-organs ; and with a
view to deny this, the author names six only—Nose, Tongue,
Eye, Skin, Ear and Mind '—by which they mean to exclude the
other five mentioned by the Sinkhyas.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

395

The assertion that, ' cognition born of the sense-organs
is sensuous *—would bring Remembrance also under the category
of * sensuous knowledge ' ; hence with a view to show that this
latter has no real object axtant at the time, the author points
out the object of' sensuous knowledge.' It is only with regard
to substance, &c., that we have sensuous knowledge; that
is to say, it appears only with regard to substances, qualities,
actions and generalities, and never with regard to Individualities
aud Inherences. Among these too, inasmuch as Substance is
the most important, be proceeds to describe the process by
which sensuous knowledge is produced with regard to it—In
regard to substance &c. The word 'tävat' ig meant to denote
sequence. He explains the reasons whereby sensuous knowledge
is produced with regard to groGs substances, in the forms of
Earkb, Water and Fire: (1) ' anekadravyavattva which means
the fact being a composite of many particle, (2) the appearance or manifestation of colour—such appearance being a property of colour, the absence of which makes the fire or light in
the water imperceptible ; (3) the presence of contact of four
things—viz\(a) that of the self with the mind, (b) of the mind
with the sense-organ, and (c) that of the organ with the object
perceived. When all these causes are present; and there is
present also the proper auxiliary in the form of dharma,
adharma and particular points of time and space, then alone
sensuous knowledge is possible. In asmuch as there is no perceptibility in the atom and the diad, we have the qualification
* gross.' The l fact of being a composite of many parts' is a
cause of perceptibility, because ehe presence of large number
of component particles, as also the excellence or otherwise
of these particles, serve, to bring about distinctness or indistinctness and Urg«nes3 or smallness of the composite who'e Even
when there is groasness and the presence of many component
particles, in Air, yet this is not perceptible; and this is due
to the absence of manifested colour in it, whereby the presence
of manifested colour is also regarded as a cause of-perceptibility.

S96

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

I aas much as all cognition is the cause of some sort of pleasure or pain, and is found to appear at definite places and times,
it is regarded as brought about by peculiarities of dharma,
adharma, time and space. In the absence of the contact of the
self with the mind, of that of the mind, with the sense-organ,
and of that of the sense-organ with the object, we have no sensuous perception; hence the con-tiact of these four is regarded
as the cause of such perception»
Objection: " If the contact of the sense*organ with the
object be the cause of perception, then, like Generalities, In*
indivdualities also would have to be perceptible, and that
would make Doubt and Misconception impossible."
Reply: Not so; as it is nofc absolutely necessary. That is
to say, the Generality consisting of many Individual objects, is
perceived merely by the contact of its substratum with the
«ye; as for the Individuality on the other hand, inasmnch as
its extent is very small, it stands in need of the contact of its
substrate and its many parts, with the eye as a whole and the
several parts of the Eye ; hence it is not absolutely necessary for
the perception of Generality to be accompanied by the perception of Individuality ; specially as the accessories vary in the two
cases. It is for this same reason that there is ooly an indistinct
perception of objects at a distance,—the reason for this being the
fact that the parts of the outgoing rays of light from the eye
get diffused in the intervening space, and hence fail to get at
the object in the proper mannen
In connection with sensuous knowledge, some people
hold the following view: " The savikalpaka, or ' determinate'
is the only sensuous knowlege; because a thing is capable of
being used only when it is in the character of action (and this'
can pertain only to objects of determinate cognition); and even
animals who are devoid any comprehension of the meanings
of words, tarn to action only after they hare a distinct; determinate cognition."

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

397

Against this view, the author says—The 'perception of the
m&reform etc., That is to say, there it simple perception, devoid
oi qualifications, of the form of the thing. If the indeterminate
cognition of the form of the thiag be not admitted, then, iuatmuch as in that case there won id be no remembrance of the
word denoting it, there could not be a determinate cognition
either. Hence one who would wish for determinate cognition
must adtait, of indeterminate cognition also.
— This indeterminate^ cognition doe* not pertain to the
Generality only ; bee «.use the factor of distinctness or difference
we peculiarity, also eaters into that cognition. Nor does it
pertain to the mere ' specific individuality ' of the thing (as
held by the Baitddkft); as the factor of generality is also present in it; and also because it is distinctly recalled on the subsequent perception of another individual of the same class« As
a matter of fact, it pertains to the Generality *s well as to the
Individuality; though it is true that there are no distiinct notions such as ' this is the Generality and that the Individuality',
jet this is due to the absence, at the time of the perception, of
another object of the same class. It is only when one thing
is cognised as having the sa ae general character as another that
ire have an idea of ' Generality' as distinct from the Individuals ; and when one thing is cognised as having a character
different from that of another that there is a distinct cognition
of the * Individuality/ At the indeterminate stage of tbe
cognition of an object, as there is ao cognition of another
object, there is no cognition either of inclusiveness—tbe
property belonging to Generality,—or of excluswenet*—the
property belonging to Individuality; and as these properties
are not cognitiou, there are no distinct notions of Generality
and Individuality. As for the cognition of the form of the thing
however, this is present; as the cognition of mere form is not
dependent on any other property, etc It is for this reason that
ail indeterminate cognition is not cognisant of the qualificatory
relationship among the Generality, the Individuality and the

398

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (20.)

apecific individuality of an object; as the cognition of this relationship is always preceded by the cognition of distinction
among these three factors, which is absent in Indeterminate
cognition. It is after this cognition that there appears the determinate congnition which in cognisant of the generic and
individual character of objects; because when a man, at the time
of cognising an object, recalls another object, he has distinct
cognitions of the fact of the former being in certain respect»
inclusive (agreeing with and similar to), and in others exclusive
of (dissimilar to) the said latter object; and it is ouly then that
th$re appear the notions of Generality and Individuality.
The ßauddhaa put forward the following argument: " It is
only the indeterminate cognidon which is uamistaken with
regard to its object, having its cognizance invariably in keeping
with the ' specific individuality' of things. A.nd for this reason
that alone, and nob determinate cognition, can be regarded as
* aensuous knowledgeJ; because determinate cognition has its
appearance dependent upon dispositions and tendencies (of the
observer); and having its cognizance not always in keeping
with the objects, is mistaken with regard to its object; as in
the case of' tufts of hair1 (seen when the eye is closed)/'
With a view to refute this view of the Bauddhas, the
author lays down the fact of the character of ' sensuous
knowledge' belonging to 'determinate cognition' also—sä manyaa
etc. ft proceeds from that contact of the self and the mind
which is dependent upon, and conditioned, by such qualifications
as those of Generality, Individuality, Substance, Quality and
Action. The cognition that' the substance is/ is qualified by
generality ; that ' it is earth,' is also qualified by the generality
'earth;' that' it has horns ' is qualified by substance; that' it is
a white cow' is qualified by Quality ; that ' ifc ' is moving' is
qualified by Action,—and every one of these is a ' sensuous
cognition. The'contact of the self and the mind' being already included in the * contact of four/ the repitition of it is

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

399

with a view to show that what is spoken of now {%. e.t determinate cognition) is something different from indeterminate
cognition. How can you assert that determinate cognition is
not a right form of knowing an object, in face of the fact that
what is cognised by the cognition ,' thia is a jar ' is a distinctly
definite object with a peculiar neck and so forth ?
Objection: " Vikalpa, * definiteness ' or ' qualification/ is
»cognition or ideation^born of nothing ; and hence the definite
or determinate cognition of an object cannot but be mistaken
us has been well said—* definiteoess consists of the manifestation of nothing, and as such not keeping with the real state of
things it is only a case of misconception."
Reply: It is not so; because in actual action, the cognition
ta found to be quite in keeping with the real state of things.
Objection: " What really happens is that the definiteness
is born of observation (and not directly of the object); and
imposing its semblance in the form of the object, it hides from
view the difference between the ' specific individuality ' of the
object and its mere semblance ; tends to make'the man turn towards the point of space occupied by the 'specifte individuality;'and also brings about an agreement (between the cognition and
the real state of things); just as the brightness of the gem does
with regard.to the gem; and the real object is got at by reason
of the indirect relationship or concomitance (between the semblanct and the object, through the specific indibidv/xlity).
Reply: If definiteness did not touch (pertain to) the real object, then how could it ever impose its own semblance in the
form of the object? As until the rays of the sun emanating
from sandy surface is seen we donot cognise the resemblance of
water imposed upon it/1
Objection: " The definiteness follows upon the wake of sensuous cognition, and taking up the function of the instrument tends to make manifest, or cognised, tue object capable

400

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CBAF. VI. SECTION (10.)

of some effective action; if it were not so, one desiring some
effective action could not be brought to act by definite cog*
nition; as has been declared—' from the defiaiteness too the ?
action is towards the object"
Reply: If such be the case then definiteness becomes a,
right form of cognising the object ; as it is fouud to give rise»!
with regard to the object, a cognition in keeping with thef
real state of things.
[Page 191.] Objection: "That point of time which is perceiv-J
ed by meaus of sensuous cognition is not cognised by the definite"
cognition; and that which is perceived by the definite cognitionj
is not got at by the subsequent activity (of the observer}; aodj
thus there is no agreement iu regard to the point of tune; as all!
the factors concerned have only momentary existence (like
things). So what We ..mean is that the point of time that all|
perceived by the deCnite cognition is similar to that perceived by means of sensuous cognition; and that which
got at by means of subsequent activity is similar to th
cogoised by definite cognition; and thus the agreement isj
merely with regard to the exclusion of contraries, without aoy..r
gard to the differences of points of time. And in this, as \
definite cognition would only be cognising what has already
been perviously cognised by sensuous cognitiou,—it cannot I
regarded as a right form of coguitiou; as for the definite
cognition born of an inferential mark, however, it is regarded!
as a right form of cogoitioa,because of the fact that it cognisepj
or comprehends, the specific individuality of a fresh obje
not already cognised by any other means of cognition."
Reply: There is not much in all this argumentati
As what is cognised by means of sensuous cognition is
the exclusion of the contrary of the moment of time, nor it
negative form in general imposed with regard to the exeffi
sion of other things, which exclusion too is of a negativ*
character; what is actually cognised is something having the

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

401

character of the cause (towards effective action); and that
which is a mere negative entity is wholly devoid of ail
effective action. As for the point of time itself, it is the
object of sensuous cognition, as it is a real entity ; being quite
capable of effective action ; and it has been said that this
point of time does not fall im with the time of the definite
cognition. Under the circumstances, bow can the Sensuous
Coguition and the Definite Cognition be regarded as having one
and the same object ? (and hence the latter cannot be said
^(Thave an object that has been already cognised). Or, we may
grant (for the sake of argument) that both these cognitions
have one and the same object, in the form of something
without any definite form, which is capable of being in keeping
with the subsequent activity of the cogniser. Even then the
Definite Coguicioa caunot lose its character of being a right
form of cognition; because like a serial cognition it is
independent of previous cognitions, in the matter of its own
objective; and also because tt is capable of leading the cogniser to what is cognised by itself. The character of the
right form of cognition being thus assured to Definite Cognition, it could be none other than ' Sensuous' in its character ;
because there are no such factors as that of the inferential
mark and so forth ; and also because it is found to follow always upon the contact of the sense-organ and the object. It
is true that though born directly of the object, it does not, like
indeterminate cognition, follow immedinteiy after the contact
of the sense-organ with it; hut-that is due to the fact of tbe
observer not remembering, at that moment, the expressive word
(denoting the object), which is a necessary aid to the object ao<i
the sense-organ (in the bringing about of definite cognitions).
Objection: "The definite cognition, follow ng as it does
upon the remembrance (of the expressive word), cannot but
be regarded as born of the remembrance, and not of the object
and the sense-organ ; as between these two and the cognition,
there is the intervening factor of the remembrauce. "

"

402
~

PRAgASTAPÄDA B&&SBYA-~OHAJ», XV. BSCTION (10.)

Reply: Well sir, does an auxiliary hide away tfce
iiality of an object? If it does so, then what have you to!
say to the case of the seed being productive of the sprout,!
when the seed will have its potentiality hidden *way by the
Auxiliaries, earth and water ?
|
Objection: "In what way does the remembrance of thai
word help the object and the sense-organ, that it could bei
regarded as their aid or auxiliary V*
I
Reply : Just as the definite'cognition needs, for its pro-1
ductiou, the contact of the object and the seasa-orgao, i
so also does it need the said remembrance; and heoce |
the help that is given by this remembrance to the object |
and the sense-organ is only this, that while these tatter are
not by themselves capable of briuging about the effect (in thai
shape of Definite Cognition), they become so capable. whea3
they obtain the aid of the remembrance. The view, thabj
those things that do not add something to the form, of the
thing cannot be regarded as 'auxiliaries,* we have refuted while
refuting the theory of the momentary character of all tilings]
(see above).
Objection: ** Sensuous cognition is devoid of kalpanaß
C definiteness' or ' determinateness,' verbal or objective); and
the cognition of definiteness is determinate ; and as such thisj
cannot be a right form of knowing things."
j
Question : - What is this ' kalpanä 1
§
"There are two kinds of Jcalpanä cognising the qualified,
object: (I) Verbal, consisting of the connecting of the object
with a word, and ^11) objective, consisting of the connecting]
of the object with (other) objects/'
I
Reply: This is not right; as the theory does not!
stand the test of an examination of its alternative forms. For]
instance, as for the cognition connecting with words, (a) does!
this connect the word with the object ? (b) or does it iteelfi

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

403

become connected with the object ? If the former, then too,
we ask—(1) doe3 it reduce the object to Uie character of
the word ? (2) or does it cogoi^a the object as tainted by the
form of the word ? (3) or does it call the object by name of
the word ?
[Page 192 ] The first of these is not possible; because in
Determinate cognition also the object appears exactly in the
same form as in.Iudeterminate cognition ; and also because it is
found to accomplish an effective action (which could not be done
_by_a_mere word). If it were not so, then there could not be a
simultaneous activity, witli regard to it, of the person knowing
the meaning of the word and another who does not kuow it.
:
In the case of (2) it is not right to assert that the Determinate cognition cognises the object as tainted by the form of
the word ; because such is not found to be the case ; as what
actually happens is that when the object has been comprehended by means of the Indeterminate Cognition, the previously
known word denoting that object is remembered at the sight of
its counterpart (in the form of the object); and the well-known
word beir»g remembered qualifies the object with regard to its
own denotation; an.l it is not that the object is cognised as
tainted by the form of the word, in the same manner as the
rock-crystal is tainted with the blue colour (of the object placed
near it) ; because the word is not visible; aud it is the object
only that is cognised as ' such and such a thing ' (by name); just
as in the case of Indeterminate Cognition. Nor is it that when
the expressive word is remembered, there is any harm done to
the form of the thing denoted by it; and hence the contact
of the object and the sense-organ being present, the mere remembrance of the name cannot deprive the cognition of its
* sensuous ' character ; as has been well said : 'the name, even
though remembered, does not set aside the seusuousness of the
object to which the name belongs; because the name is absolutely indifferent, and not capable of concealing the form or
character of an object.1

404

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VL SECTION (10.)

(3) Nor can we believe that the cognition names or mentions the object as connected with the word. Because it ig
the intelligent Self which, through its power of recalling impressions, remembers the expressive word he had come to
know at the time of the convention determining its meaning;
and then names or speaks of the object by means of that word—
e. g., * this is ajarf this cannot be done by the Cognition which,
being unintelligent, is devoid of the faculty of recalling impre»sions, Hence it is proved that the Cognition cannot connect the object with the word.
(o) Nor does the object by itself become connected with
the word ; because the Cognition as well as the form that is
inseparable from it, being momentary, is each independent"
by itself; and hence no word being capable of belonging to a
number of these in common, they are incapable of any convention ; and hence they cannot become connected with
words; and also because the word which denotes the object can«:
not be use«! to speak of either the object or the cognition of thai
object which is something wholly different from the object
5
OJjjeciion: " Determinate cognition has its object soch asj
is connected with words. And the object becoming connected
with the word comes to be spoken of by means of that word;,
and it is with reference to this that we have the conventional
4
denotation of the word. This convention too pertains to that
1
which is nou-momentary in its character, and is common
among many things; and neither the ' specific individuality/
nor the cognitiou of the specific individuality, nor the form of
ehe cognition, is either common or noa-momentary. As for
the externality of the form of cognition, that too is something
distinct from the form of the cognition, and is something
wholly uncommon or specific. Then as for Generality, there
is no such real entity; as that has been shown to be incapable
of standing the test of examination. Consequently, there
^ no comprehension of difference among the particular

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

405

forms of the cognition, e«*ch of which in its external character is
imposed upon it by the determinate coguitions, aud sin^leuess
also being imposed upon it through the exclusion of all that is
other than that cognition,—there follows the convention with
regard to the word. This being proved by proper evidence
cannot be denied. Thus then, the determinate cognition,
functioning towards the unreal object connected witiU the
word, brings about the cognizance of an object chat has no
existeuce; and this is what is meant by 'kdpand or ' jnana,'
1
cognition.' As has been wetl said : * In any kalpanä the t'orrn,
that appears as one, corning as it were from elsewhere, and
being something excluded from other things,—has no real
esseuce (or existence»: because it does not form a factor in
actual (sensuous) cognition."
1193] Reply:—If the nature of kalpanä lies in the comprehending of something qualified by the generality, there
i beiug uo such real entity as generality by itself,—then it would
consist in something having for its object that which, has no
existence; and not in the comprehending of something connected with word. Under the circumstances, if we succeed
in proviug the existence of generality, then, even though'
Determinate Cognition might be comprehensive of objects
connected with words, it could not but be regarded as 'Sensuous,'
inasmuch as it is produced by the contact of th.e object
with the sense-organ ; specially as that which contains a direct
and distinct manifestation is ' Sensuous/—as wefindin. the case
of Indeterminate Cognition; aud Determinate Cognition is
one that contains a direct and distinct manifestation. Cognitions
are indirect whenever they are not produced by the contact of
the object with the sense-organs; as we find in the case of inferential cognition ; and the fact of being produced by such contact
of the object with the sense-organ, which is the contradictory
of the feet of not being produced by such corftact, is distinctly
cognisable in Indeterminate Cognition; and hence your theory
would involve the ' contradiction -of the vydpaka' (i. e.t in

406

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

determinate cognition we find the character of being produced
by sense-contact, and this character i3 contradictory to the cbarac* |
fcer of not being 'produced by sense-contact; this latter is always
accompanied by indirectness; hence the attributing of indirect" |
which would jriecessarily imply the presence of the |
character of not being born of sense-contact, to Determinate |
Cognition would involve a contradict ion).
,.,|
;
Objection: " We can bring forward a s milar argument!
in support of the opposite view : That cognition which is pie- ,
ceded by remembrance is non-sensuous,—as inferential cog- :~
nition ; Determinate cognition is preceded by remembrance;!
(hence it is non-sensuous)."
i
Reply : If sensuousness is ever perceived, it is only in ^
determinate Cognitions; and hence it cannot be denied ; as all i
denial is preceded by the previous presence of (that which is J
denied).
|
Objection: " Sensuousness is cognised in Indeterminate •
cognition» by an inference based upon the fact of the appear^
ance of Indeterminate Cognitions being invariably concomitant
with the contact of the object with the sense-oigans."
|
Reply: If you once admit the truth of the inference of awi-jj
8t(,oumes8 from invariable concomitance (of sense-contact},]
then (as this concomitance would be present in the case of Deter-j
rainate Cognitions also; the Inference whereby you seek to^
negative the sensuousness of these cognitions would be opera-.
ing against that former inference ; and as such would be nega~j
tived by tjiat same inference, just like the proposition * sound
is not perceived by the ear/'
|
Thus then b dp and cannot be a cognition consisting in
:
the connecting of word.
*
II—Nor can Icatpand be the cognition of a qualified object,"
snH consist in the connection of objects ; as the qualification, the
qualified, and the relationship between these two of the differ en-

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES A2TD DISSIMILAKITIES,

407

tium and the differentiated,—are all real (and as such cannot be
called * Kalpanä ' which by its very nature, must be unreal).
Objection : " A Cognition consists in the comprehension of
an object; and it appears from sense-contact, exactly in accordance with the character of the object as it presents itself at
first sight; and it does not operate after any deliberation. A
determinate cognition however is deliberate in its character,
involving many such deliberations,—' this is the qualification,—
that the qualified,—such and such is the relationship between
. them,—the ways of meo are such that they apeak of the man
with the stick, and not of the stick with the man ' and so forth ;
:
and the observer having considered ail these facts collates them
and then arrives at the determinate cognition that ' this is the
man with a stick.' If the qualified character of the object
were real, tthen at the very first sight it would be cognised as
such. And as it is not so cognised at first sight, its qualified
character cannot be regarded as real; it must be unreal and
adventitious. Hence we conclude that the cognition of the
qualified character of an object is Kalpanä."
Reply: III argued has this been by you, my good Sir!
It is the intelligent self who, having comprehended each one of
the qualification etc., and thought over them, comes to cognise, by
his sense-organs, the qualified character of the object; and this is
not done by the Cognition, which is unintelligent and as such incapable of thinking over the qualifications ; specially as it does
not operate intermittently. As for the object, it is always quali*
fied, on account of its connection with qualifications ; and the fact
of its not being perceived as qualified by the sense-organ is due to
the absence of the necessary aids in the form of the comprehension of the qualifications ; and as soon as thes equalifications are
comprehended, it at once becomes cognised as qualified. Thus
t^en, even in presence yf the indubitable fact of the qualified
cognition being born of sense-contact, if sensuous character be
dented to it, merely for the fault of being qualified,—then stich

408

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

a reasoning is too clever to be refuted ! So we close this discussion
here.
[Page 194]. The author proceeds to describe the causes of..
the sensuous cognition of Colour &c.—Ruparasa etc., etc. The
word ' anekadravyam' means that substance which inheres
in, is made up of, many component parts. The * svagatari
vicesha ' is the character of taste in Taste, the character of\
odour in Odour, the character of touch in Touch, and so forth.
From the contact of their substrates with the cognitive senseorgans, appears a distinctive cognition brought about by each
of the sense-organs—viz: the cognition of colour is brought
about by the Eye, that of taste by the Tongue, that of odour b;
the Nose, and that of touch by the Skin. As the specific,
character of each is also a cause of perception, there is a restriction
as to the operation of the sense-organs ; otherwise, if -,here were1
no difference, there would be a confusion in the sense-operationsj
As for sound, which inheres in the Ear, its perception is
brought about by the 'contact of three '—viz : of the self, the
mind and the sense-organ; as for the contact of the objeci
(sound) with the organ, this is implied iu the qualificatioi
'which inheres in the Ear' (aound inhering in the .aar, therej
is no need of contact); it ia perceived by that same organ *—Li
by the Ear.
Number etc down to Action, when inhering in perceptible substances, are perceived by the Eye and the organ of Touchi
Objection: " We cannot allow that Action is perceptible |
as when a substance moves, we do not perceive anything else]
except certain conjunctions and disjunctious (and these are only
Qualities, while Action is a distinct category). As for the notion
* it moves/ it pertains to an act inferred from the said coujunc|
tions and disj unctions/'
1
Reply: In this argument there is nothing to recommend
itself. If Action were imperceptible, and «ouly to be inferred
from conjunctions and disjunctions, then, inasmuch as thes«

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

409

conjunctions and disjunctions always belong to two substrates
(/. i. the moving object.and the ground it moves upon), the
action (of moving) could be inferred (and believed) to exait in
the other substrate (ground) also. As a matter of fact, however,
we find that when the monkey moves from the top of the tree
to its root, and again from the root to the top, we have no such
notion as that ' the tree moves/ though the tree also is the
substrate of the conjunctions and disjunctions (of the monkey).
Objection : " The non-inference of Action in the tree is due
to the fact that in the case in question the monkey has certain
other conjunctions also, as for instance those with the points of
space and the like, and these other conjunctions are not; known
to be bought about by any action of the tree."
Reply: If such be the case then, for the sake of these
other conjunctions of the monkey with the points in space, we
might assume another action of the monkey; iu auy case the
assumption of action in the tree would nut beset aside. There
is a general law to the effect that the substratum, of the cause
(action) is the same as the substratum of the effect (conjunction
and;disjunction) and if this law were rejected in one instance,
how could we believe in it in other instances ?
Objection: " When we have assumed the action of ther
monkey (on the strength of inference from conjunctions and disjunctions), that is found enough to explain all such conjunctions
of the monkey as those with the tree and with the points in
space ; and as such there is no ground for assuming the action
of both (the monkey and the tree).*
Reply: It is not so, as all that is needed for inference is
that whenever the pervaded (or less extensive) mark is
perceived, it points to the presence of its pervasive (more
extensive) concomitant. And in what way couid such an
inference be disturbed, as Apparent Inconsistency is, by other
explanations (of the premisses)! Nor is ehe Inference AD intelligent being like man, that it should operate with due regard to

410

PKA£ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. 71. SECTION (10.)

certain purposes in view^ If you seek to assume the conjunctions and disjunctions of any one point in space as the cause
of the inference of action,—then we say that such an assumption cannot he made; hecause of the im perceptibility of the
conjunctions and disjunctions of space which is beyond the
reach of the senses. If, then, the action be sought to be inferred from the series of conjunctions and disjunctions of a
certain portion of the Earth-globe, then the action of the flying
bird would be absolutely inexplicable and incomprehensible.
If the inferential mark ia this case were sought to be found
in the conjunctions and disjunctions of the light overspreading
the atmosphere,—then there could be no basis or explanation
for such notions as ' my arm is throbbing,' ' my eyebrow is
moving';—notions born of the sense of touch as controlled by
the invisible internal organ,—actions which appear, in dense
darkness, by reason of the action of disordered wind in the body;
how too could you explain the notion of moving that we have,
in an intensely dark and cloudy night, with regard to the
lightning flash which lasts for a moment (and is not perceived
as having any conjunctions or disjunctions) ?
The perception of buddhi and other qualities belonging to
the self is due to its iuherence in something in conjunction
with the sense-orgun. As for sattd, ' being,1 dravyatva and
other such (abstract) qualities, these are perceived by the
same sense-organ by which their substrates are perceived.
(1) The perception of Substance is due to Conjunction
(direct contact of the sense-organ); (2) that of Quality &c., is
.due to their inherence in something in direct contact with the
sense-organs; (3) that of * gunatva'' the character of quality' is.
due to their inherence in something inhering in that which is
in direct contact with the sense-organs ; (4) that of sound is
due to inherence (in the sense-organ); (5) that of ' gabdatva'
is due to its inherence in that which inheres in the sense*
organ; (6) and that of negation is due to its qualifying that which
is related to the sense-organs; these are the six kinds of

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

411

* sense-contact \ There are certain perceptions of negation,—
such for instance as (a) the perception of the absence of taste
&c, in colour, which is due to its qualifying that which inhere«
in a thing in contact with the aense-orgun; (6) that of the
negation of * rasatva' (fee, in ' riipatva,' which is due to its
qualifying the qualification existing in something inhering
in that which is in contact; (c) that of the absence of the
letter 'kha*>n the letter fhi,' which is due to its qualifying
that which inheres in the sense-organ; and (d) that of the
absence of ' khatva ' in ' Jcatva' which is due to its qualifying
that which inheres in something iahering in the sen*se-organs.
All these sources of perception however are included in the
* qualifying of that which is related to the sense-organ ' (which
has beeu mentioned as the cause of the perception of negation
iu general).
Some people regard either Conjunction only or Inherence
only as the cause of perception ; and they deny the intervening
relationships mentioned above.
The nature of things is such that they are perceived only
through contact with something eise (the sense-organs); as for
the possibility of confusion and uncertainty of perception, it is
obviated by the restriction or limitation due to the proximity
of their substratum.
Recapitulation: Such is the perception of us, who are not
Yogis. The author proceeds to describe the ' sensuous cognition* of the Yogis: As for those that differ from us <itc.t by
' y°9a ' here we mean ' ecstacy •/ and it is of two kinds the
Conscious or Concrete and the Unconscious or Abstract. The
* concrete ecstacy ' consists in the contact of the mind, which
has been controlled and concentrated upon a> portion of
the self, with the self in whom there is a desire for knowledge ;
and the * Abstract ecstacy ' consist, in the contact without any
end in view, of the controlled' mind with a part of the self
arising from ' non-rising' or undisturbed state of the mind.

412

PRAgASTAPADA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VL SECTION (10.)

Of these two, the latter belongs to the seeker after deliverance,
and serving the purpose of dissipating ignoruuce, comes to be
fully developed in the last life of the^'ira upon earth ; it does not
add auy dharma, because of the absence of the necessary accessory cause in the shape of a longing or desire (for either acquiring dharma or avoiding adharma); nor does it tend torwards
any external object, being centered in the self alone; the former
(concrete) ecstacy on the other haud, is always aided by a
certain desire, and as such brings about dharma ; and it always
illuminates that external object with regard to which there is ill
the mind a desLe tu know the truth. These are the two kinds
of ecstacy or yoga; and those who have once experienced this
ecstacy, arft called 'yogis* even wheri they have fallen of from
that couditiou ; because of the capability in them (of returning
to the same couditiou).
Inasmuch as the yogis have no perception of supefsenBuous objects, until the covering of impurities have bt^en removed from thier minds, the author adds that while in the
state of ecstacy, by means of their iuiu<is helped by dharma
born of yoga, they obtain perfectly true conceptions with regard
to. their own selves as well as bo those of others, and also with regard to akägci (space), time, air, atoms, minds, the qualities belonging to the last two, ami inherence. By ourselves the self is
always cognised in tbe character of the doer and the possessor as
expressed in the notions of ' I ' and ' mine'; both these character» however are due to the connection of the self witL such
limitations as those of the body &c, and they are not natural
to the self; wherry both these notious are calktj \false perceptiou,' iu all systems of philosophy; simply bectmse Uisy
contain conceptions contrary to the-true state of things. The
natural form of the self is perceived by tue yogis, alone. When
the yogi makes ur his mind to know the true character of the
self a* taught in the Vedantas (UpamshaU), he withdraws his
mmd from tbe external sense-organs, aud fixing it upon a definite part of the self he continues one-pointedly to practise

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

4]$

meditation upon the self; and then there coming into manifestation such of his dharma as tends to the accomplishment of
his true knowledge, there clearly appears before his mind the real
self free from all impositions of the * I ' or the' mine/ When however he practises meditation with a view to learn the truth with
regard to other selves or with the regard to space, time &c. then
there comes a I »out a dhaf.na of considerable force helping his
acquisition of true knowledge with regard to those things ;aud by
the force of^tfis, his internal organ shooting out of his external
body, comes into contact with those other selves &c., and then
brings about the due cognition of these through contact, of their
qualities through the inherence of these in something in contact
with the internal organ, of the ganatva of the qualities through
inherence in something iuhereing in that which is in direct
contact, and of the absence of Inherence through the qualification of that which is related to the internal organ. Even in the
case of the sciences and the arts we find that even when there is
no proper knowledge of these, when due attention is paid and
the mind fixed in constant meditation upon those subjects, the
knowledge comes in due course.
These arguments have elsewhere been put in the form of
the following inferential reasouiugs:—(1) The collective force of
constant contemplation of the self, äkdga and such things, is the
cause of the true knowledge of these,—because it is a particular
kind of practice,—like the practice of learning the sciences and
arts ; and (2) the vary in? grades of the intellect (involved in the
practice) have a certain limit; beyond which it does not go,—because they are varying grades,—like the varying grades of dir
mension. [And the true knowledge of self &c. would be those
limits].
Objection: " In the case of water that is being heated we
find that there are varying grades of heat; and yet we never
find it ever reaching the highest limit» of heat by being turned
into fire itself (and from this it is clear that the mere presence
of varying grades does not necessitate the reaching of the

414

PRA(?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI, SECTION (10.)

highest limit); nor do we ever perceive any limit upon the
practice of jumping; as there is no man that can jump over all
the three worlds (and until this limit is reached there would
always be varying grades of jumping)."
Reply: When a property that has a permanent substratum
produces a peculiarity in its subtratum, a practice or repitition which would be of the nature of such a property would,
gradually, reach the highest limit of excellence ; as for instance when gold is repeatedly heated and treated by the method
of 'putapaka' its purity gradually reaches the highest limit
in acquiring the character of the raktasdra (V). As for the
htating of tv.iter, it has got no permanent substratum, wherein
reptetion could bring it up to the highest limit; this absence
of the permanent substratum is proved by the fact of the water
entirely disappearing on the application of great heat. Then
as for the practice of jumping, it is not productive'of any peculiarity in its substratum ; because the first jumping having been
totally destroyed, leaving no traces behind, the second aud
subsequent j um pings might be the effects of other forces and
efforts, like an altogether new jumping-{and hence any susequent
excellence of jumping need not necessarily be attributed to the
previous jumping). It is for this reason that we find that when
the man is tired by three or four jumps, his limit of jumping
begins to decline, on account of the decrease of strength (and
this could not be if practice brought about gradual improvenveot). As for buddhi on the other hand, it has a permanent
substratum, aud briugs about peculiar characters iu its
substratum ; as we find that though something may not be
comprehended at first, it becomes duly comprehended, when the
buddhi is repeatedly applied to it, And thus the previous repitition always producing a higher peculiarity in it at each step
of the practice, when the practice is kept up continuously and
with great care for a long time, the buddhit having obtained
fresh force due to dhwma born of yoga, must reach its highest
limit; and there is nothiog unreasonable or improbable in this.

QUALITIES :. SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILA RITIE3.

415

Then again it has been- argoed that,' yogis cannot perceive
aupersensuous things,—because they are living beings—like ourselves'; and if this has, been argued with regard to all men, then
it becomes superfluous (as we too do not admit it of all men);
and as for any particular kiud of men, our opponent does
not admit of any such (as they do not admit of men acquiring
any powers by yoga) ; if be should know of any such man, then
his argument would become contrary to the means of knowledge
whereby such a/person (who would form the subject of his conclusion) would be known (as the argument is meant to deny the
existence of any such person with peculiar powers &c).
Objection : " Your argument is an instance of 'prasangfiaädhana (the proving of an undesirable contingency)'; and such
an argument is rightly brought forward, never for the establishing of one's own position, but for the showing of an undesirable
element in the .opponent's view of the case. But this Undesirable element also can be rightly brought home to the opponent
only when proved by means of such dharma Sec. as are admitted
by him ; and it is not necessary that the person putting forward
those should know and believe them to be true himself. For
the opponent can never come forward with the assertion—
'these dharma &c. are not admitted by you; and I cannot
understand them even though they are admitted by me'."
Reply: Is this ' prasang-asädhana* an Inference or something else ? If it is something other than Inference, then it
should be shown to which ' means of knowledge ' above described
it belongs; or a distinct definition of it should be given. If,
however, it is only au Iuference, then it can operate only as based
upon a previous cognition of the person bringing it forward; as a
'parärtha anumäna' (inference for the sake of others) is always
put forward with a view to produce in the mind of the other pepson a firm conviction similar to that in the mind of the speaker
himself. If it were not so, then it would be possible to admit
the evidential authority of such inferential arguments as—' the
sky-lotus is sweet-smelling, because it is a lotus, like the lotus

PRA<?A3TAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VL SECTION (10).
la the tank ;'—even though it has a subject whose existence is
not admitted by the pro pounder of the argument.*
Then as for the fact of yogis being * living beings ' (which
hag been brought forward by the opponent as a reason foi
denying their supersensuous vision), and such other facts, these
are cases of doubtful concomitance. If the great man under
consideration were to have the character of a ' living being ' he.
might also have omniscience,—what inherent in probability ;
could there be in this ? Certainly no inconsistency has ever
been found between 'omniscience* and the character of * i>ving
being.1 But omniscience being cognisable by other means of I
knowledge, its concomitance with the character of' living being* J
would always be doubtful; as ic cannot be definitely ascertained i
whether our wmt of omniscience is due to our character of
living beings, or to the absence of the dkarma born of yoga,
which is recognised as the cause of the knowledge of all things, i
Consequently the 'character of living beings', having its concomitauce doubtful, cannot prove the inferential conclusion (that
the yogi can have no supersensuous cognition).
,
Objection: " It is not yet proved that dkarma born of yoga
is the cause of »uperseusuous cognition; and under the circumstances, how can our want of omniscience be suspected of
being due to the absence of that dkarma ?"
Reply : To us the fact is well-known and fully established;
hence it is that we suspect it. Thus then, the invariable con»
comiranee (of 'the character of living beings' and * want of super*
sensuous» knowledge' is not one that is accepted by both parties;
how then could there be any right inference based upon it ?
Page 198] Having described the sensuous perception of yogis
in ecstney, the author proceeds to describe that of those ottt of
the ecrtafeic condition. Persons who have accumulated a
store of dharma by yoga, even when not inihe state oisamadhi
* Thereading'bhyupagatatiddhti* doe« not give good «••&«, hence the tranik-J
tioa h*6 adopted tke reading given in the footnote.
'*•

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

4I7

or ecstasy, do perceive things beyond the ordinary rang'e of the
senses ; and it rs these persons in this state that» are catled*
* viyukta *, ' non-ecstatic/ When these persons, having before
them all the best of objects, and having none? of one effective'
causes dulled in any way, come to have the contact of the four
things,—self, mind, sense-organ and the object,—and this contact
is aided by the dkdrma born of their yogic practices,—then,
through the said contact thus helped, they' come to have direct'
sensuous perception of subtle things, like the mind, the atom
&c, of things .hidden from ordinary view (though close to us)
like the nether region of serpents, and of distant things like!
the region of Brahma and the like.
Sensuous perception has b6en fully described ; aiid the'
author ttöxt proceeds to distinguish the ' result•' of this'means of
knowledge. In regard to Generalities^like ' sdtta \ 'dravyat*
vct\ 'gunatva', ' karriiatva' &c.,—and aläo with regard to
Individualities, the ' means of knowledge J is in the form of the
mere (älocana of form ', free from all qualifying definiteness,
* vikalpa,'; as it is this 'cognition ' that forms the most efficient
means of the right knowledge of the thing; this exceptional
1
efficiency' being inferred from the faet of its having the
peculiarity that when this is present the person desiring
knowledge is sure to have it. The character of toe cogniser
and the cognised is such that when these are present, knowledge
is possible, and not that it must appear ; but the nature of the
' means of cognition ' is such that when it is present, in the
form, of the abstract cognition of the qualification &c, it is
absolutely certain that the cognition or knowledge, of the quali*
fied object will duly appear.
The pramcyas, (knowfcbles/ are the four categories
substance &c, That fa to say, when cognition has appeared, it
is with regard to these that the action of rejection or acceptance follows*. Tbe pratnäta, *'knower', k the self, as^it* is in
this that the knowledge mh'eWc Framizi,' mäowed'ge ' is't&e
--

418

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (10.)

knowledge of substance &c. That is to say, when the abstract
cognition of Generalities and Individualities is the pramäim
1
means of knowledge/ then the qualified cognition of the s u ^
tance &c. -is the pramiti, ' kuowledge'; when, however, the
abstract cognition of Generalities and Individualities also has the,
form of 'knowledge', bejng as it is of the nature of Cognition of
objects', then with reference to that the ' means of sensuous
knowledge ' is in the form of the mere indistinct älocxna. The
word * älocana' means that tuherehy a thing is perceived,
which is the contact of the object with the sense-organ; and it
is this mere sense-contact independently of any actual cognition, that forms the ' means ' of the knowledge of Generalities
and Individualities. Even for the cognition of the qualified
object, this sense-contact is the ' means ', because of its inherent
characterof being the ' means' of cognition; but with this
difference that, in this latter it acts as the ' means * only, as
helping the cognition of the qualification, and not independent«'
]y by itself; while in the case of the abstract cognition of
Generalities and Individualities it operates by itself, independently of actual cognition;
\
Page 199. The author proceeds to show how mere ' contact',
is the ' means of knowledge ' in this case, and uot actual cog-\
nition. For the cognitiou of Generalities and Individualities
there is no other ' means \ in the form of coguition,—because
the cognition of Generalities and Individualities has not the
character of a * result', and as such it cannot be the result of
any cognition ; the ' cognition of the qualified ' is the result of
the ' cognition of the qualification '; an<l this latter cannot be;
the result of another cognition ; as, if it were, then there
would be no end of such cognition upon cognition. Hence it
mu/Bt be admitted that for the ' cognition of qualification ' the
only ' means ' that there can be is the contact of the senseorgan with the object.
Thus then, it has been shown that when the abstract
cognition of Generalities and Individualities is the ' result 'j

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

419

then the contact of the object with the seose-orgaa is the
* meaas'; and when the concrete cognition of the qualified
is the 'result* then the mere abstract cognition of th<* Generalities and Individualities is the * means'; and the author next
points out that when the idea of * acceptance * or ' rejection '
is the ' result \ then the cognition of the qualified is the
,.' means \ With regard to all things the ' pratyaksha means of
knowledge* is that cognition born of the contact of four, three
or two factors, / which is ' not false'—%JC. free from doubts and
mistakes—and which is avyapadecya, ' not produced by words'.
Doubt, while showing an object as having two fleeting
characters, lands the observer upon it as if it had a single
.fixedcharacter ; and hence bringing about a contrary conviction it is regarded as vitatk* ' false '; and as such is precluded
by the word ' avitatha.* When a man, who does not know the
meaning of the word ' cow/ has his eyes turned towards an
object near him, and when he hears the word ' cow' uttered
in its connection, he has the cognition of the ' cow'; and for
this cognition the sense-organ of the Eye is also a means *, as
otherwise he could not have any cognition of each line (on the
cow's body). But even then it is not' sensuous/ because the moat
effective means of its appearance has l>een the word uttered .
between the sight of the animal and the cognition in question ;
and the sense-organ has acted merely as an aid. Hence it is
that when asked, the man says—' this animal has been spoken
of by means of the word cow,' and not that' I have perceived
by means of the senses that it is a cow! And it is with a view
to preclude this verbal element in the cognition that the author
has added the word ' avyapadegya.'
(Joqrdtion consists in the perception o/Uie goodness, badness or indifferent character of the object. The perception of
goodness constitutes the cognition of the thing as something to be
acquired ; the perception of badness constitutes the cognition of
it as something to be rejected or avoided ; and the perception

420

PKA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA— CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

of tlie indifferent character constitutes the cognition that the
thing is neither to be acquired nor to-be avoided. Whenever
the form of an object has been duly cognised, we remember the.
help or otherwise accorded to us by it in the past; then vra:-,
come to form definite notions as to whether it is a source of 1
pleasure or pain: and then we have the cognition; as' to itsacquirability or otherwise ; and this last cognition canuot btitj
be the result of the 'cognition of the form of the object7 ; ch&i
remembrance of pleasure &c., only being intervening agencies^
as has been well said—" than which occurs in the interim m the"
action of the origiuai cause."
I
Others hold the following vie\f: "The cognition of the
thing as a source of pleasure, in the same as the cognition of\
its goodness, and also thy same as the cognition of it* being?
an objectfifctobe acquired; and similarly the cognition of it as^
a source of pain is. the same as the cognition of its badness, asi
also the cognition of it as something to be avoided.* And ail
this appearing as it does as ' direct cognition,' is the ' result' of
* senäuous cognition' which is aided i»y practice, which perceiv-f
ing. the mere form of the object, is free from any notion of dis-*
tinguishing marks, and which is independent of all idea of
invariable concomitance.
J
Page 200] Tfeet (100)—2%e laingika, l inferential; cognir:
tion is thai whick proceeds from the sight or perception of the linga, mark or ' proban» !
Commentary.
By the word * dargana * here is meant 'comprehension/
and not ' sight' or 'visual, perception;' as we often have;
chances of infering what has been inferred (and in this case
) the inference would be -based upon a previous" inference and
not upon actual perception). When one sees or perceived the
Itiiga, an impression also is produced in'bis mind, ofthat linga;
* Four lines have been wrongly inserted here aa rightly noted in the fooe-oote
on page 260.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

421

but this is not what is meant here ; as it happens to be mentioned io connection with ßuddki (which precludes the possibility of the sentence refering to any mere impression«)*
The prefix ' satn * (in sanjdydmdnam') expressing true or
real serves to exclude doubts, misconceptions and remembrances.
The sentence thus comes to mean that tbe 'inferential is that
which truly, really or rightly proceeda from the cognition of the
linga! That thiscognition belonging to the clas3 of ' crue cognitions-is-proG need as pertaining to a real object is due to the
fact of such pertaining to reality being in the very nature (the
' family trait') of all cognitions. Doubt and Misconception pertaiu to thatstate of tbe object in which it never exists. Remembrance also does not pertain Co the object, being,, as it is,
dependent upon a previous cognition, as we ahall show later on.
Other people declare that Doubt and Misconception are excluded by tbe fact of the definition appearing under the heading
oi •' Vidyä' (while these two are forms of avidyd); and with a
view to exclude Remembrance which ia not produced from real
objects in the present, they repeat, in the present connection,
the sentence. ' it appears with reference to substance and other
categories.1
But this is not right j because so long as we can get at the
desired thing (the exclusion of Doubt &c.) by the sentence itself,
we need not have recourse to the indications of the context:
Then again, if remembrance were excluded simply on tbe
ground of its not pertaining to real objects in the present, then
we would also have to exclude such inferences as pertain to
past and future objects.
The author proceeds to supply the definition oilinga.
Text (101):—The Ywgaü that which is related to (he
object to be inferred,, and is known to exist in
Mat which is connected with that object, not eocisi-

422

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)
ing in that wherein that is not present—such a
linga is the means of inference. (IX—ii— 1).
That which is otherwise than Ulis, being devoid of either
*one or both of these characteristics, is either contradictoj-y,* or * unknown' or * doubtful'; and %6
fwt a linga ; so said Käcyapa.

Commentary.
The * object to be inferred f is that object which is qualified by the property meant to be proved (by the inference) as
existing therein. ' Which is related to 'means which exists in.
Just as the linga existing in a part of the vipaksha (that wherein
the Pro band um is known tobe absent) is called 'vipakshavrtti'
(existing in the vipakiha^, so, in the same manner, that which
exiBts in a part of the paksha (the subject of tbe inference) is i
aaid to be ' related to the object to be inferred'
Objection: " If it be so, then, the reason involved in the
argument—5 the four kinds of atoms are transient, because of
their being odorous.'—Even though partially unknown (odour ,
not being present in any atom except those of Earth), will
hare to be regarded as trne reason (because of odour existingl
ia a part of the paksha,* four atoms')."
Reply: Not so; because of dissimilarity ; that is to say, a
vipaksha is that which forms an object (substratum) of the exclusion of the sadhya (the factor to be proved by the inference) >|
and the sddhana (the Reason or Probans); and this exclusion is
possible, not from the atoms taken collectively, but from each of I
them singly; and hence it is %ach of the four atoms to which belongs the character of vipaksha. The paksha on the other hand, |
ig that where in the arguer wishes to establish the existence of |
the property t<> be proved. In the case of the argument |
in question, what the arguer wishes to prove is the transient *
character, not of the Earth-atom alone, but of all the four f
atoms; and thus, all the four atoms collectively having the
character of the paksha, the 'partially unknown* reason be-

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

423

comee excluded in the same way as the * unknown/ because
, the former also is not related to the ' object to be inferred/
* Is knoxon to exist in that which is connected with that
object1—by * that object' here is meant the property that has
to be proved by the inference; and the clause thus means 'that
which is known as existing in the sapaksha, which is the object
possessed of the property sought to be proved.' This qualification is meant to exclude such reasons as are viruddha and
asädhärana (faults of reasoning explained below).
4

Not existing in that wherein that is not present'—here
also the latter * that' refers to the property to be proved ; and
the clause means that it may not be existing even in a part of
it; and hence the anaikdntika, reason is excluded.
)
' Such linga is the means of inference—i.e. it is the means
of knowing the object to be inferred.
Having described the linga, the author proceeds to describe the lingdblidsa, the 'semblance of reason/ the 'false or
invalid reason,'—' That which is otherwise than this *—i e.
That reason which is devoid of one or both of the characteristics pointed out before, and is thus either ' contradictory/ ' unknown ' or ' doubtful/ has been described by the son of Kacyapa
as ' cUingaJ—t. e., not a means of obtaining a right knowledge
of the object to be inferred ; as the 'unknown ' reason does
not exist in that object; the anaikäntika or 'Doubtful'
reason is not wholly preclusive of the coutradictory of the
substratum of that object; hence these two fallacious reasons
are precluded by the first qualification of linga (in the above
definition) ; and as for the ' contradictory' reason, it does not
exist in the sayaksha, the substratum of the object to be inferred ; nor is it preclusive of its contradictory; and beuce it is
precluded by the second qualification in the definition.
Text (102):—(1^ That which is concomitant, eit/ter in time
or place, with the 'object to be inferred?-—(2)

PBA<?A8TAPÄDA, BH&ägYA-CHAP. VI.
which is known to exist either in the whole or
iff a pqrt of something endowed with t/iß property
of the inferred',—and (3) which ia authoritatively
known to de non-existing in the whole of that
which is contrary to the ' object to be inferred \—
serves to bring about the inference of the unknown
object, and it i« Minga ' {Inferential Indicative),
Commentary.
The author proceeds to explain the above verse«. (1)
That whiqb is concomitant or related with the object to be inferred,-^. e.t the object possessed of the property to be proved,—
ia regan} $o particular points of time and place ; (2) which ia
known, by the right means of knowledge, to exist in another
öbiect fthe sapaksha) which is endowed with the property of
the inferred, either in the whole of it or in a part of it only,
and (3) which is known also to be non-existent in an object which
is contrary to that to be proved,—i. e., that which is the substratum of the negation of that object;—such» a thing becomes
the linga, serving to bring about the inferential knowledge of
the unkuown object as possessing the property to be proved.
t l?&ffO 2 0 2 ) * Concomitant either in time or place '—This has
been added with a view to show that the linga brings about the
inferential knowledge of the ' property to be proved ' as belonging to thß ' Qbjectto be proved/ in regard to only that point of
tirne and. place with regard to which the invariable concomitance of that property with the object put forward as the corroborating instance may have been shown.
In the VihoU or in a p<*vt, <&£.'—-This is added with a view
tc show that the character of the true Reason belongs to thai/
which extends over a part of the sapak$ha (the object known
to possess, the property tp hfl prayed), as much as to that
pervading over the whole of it.
* B,o.7i-e$i*twg in the, whoU <fec.'—This is added for the
e of siio vying that the character of the true Reason can-

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

425-

not belong to that which exists m a part of the vip&kzka (the
object whereto the property to be proved is- found to- he uoaexisting) ; iu as-much aa to that existing over, the whole of it.
Certain irresponsible babblers asaerC as- follows*: "For the
"due accompli&ba>eat of the means of right knowledge* (Inferi4
enee), it is not necessary that we should perceive or recognise
"an instance of dissimilarity (that ma ease of the Keason not
11
existing ia the vipahska) ? because (evenwitshout the recognit i o n of any actual instance),, k would be enough if we were bo*
" aay simpiy^thrat ' where this (the property ta be proree^) is- not,
if
that (the reason} is not/—which would eKif&w to show that
<(
the exclusion of the property te* be proved is a m>re indicative
"of the excl us-ion o^ the Reason. To-1 hi a effect they qtuofce ^he
"following: 'For thp& reason; an instance of similarity is not
**• necessary aa a basis in this con»ection ; as eye» i» the absence
"of this the oogortion nwy be obtained by the assertion- ttm.t
'* in the kbsence of this that does not eoeist"
With a view ta de»y this, the author say»—* authoritatively r—i e., that which is realty recoguked by the due mean» of
cognition, and not by mere word», a» »oft existing: m the contrary of the*' inferred/ is the linga. Mere words, without dueauthority, would be available in aü cases p and bence if conclusions- were to be drawn o*v the strength of mere verbal assertionthen there could be no dißereace between the true awd the
fallacious Reason.
Objection t "Tbe above definition o( linga. 19 £o<vwide
as it applies to such fallacious reasons also as the 'Pralcaranasama' and the * Käfdrya>/äpadislda ' (see below}/'
To tfm some people make fehe following reply: Tliese two«
fallacious reasons are actually included in the c mnmk&niika r
(Poubtful) Keaaon ; because the Prakarana*am# reaso» exist»
in such an object wifch the property to be proved as is Habile to
being donated to be a vipuktha ; and the KälcUyayäpadishto
exists in that wfyich is absolutely recognised a? the vipahska.

426

PIUgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

For instauce, the 'Pralc&ranasama'reason is that which gives rise
to tl«e idea of the contest { prakarana ' which is that which
is introduced (prakriyate); i. e., the pa/csha (subject) and the
vifafaka (its contrary) ; ami giviug rise to ideas of these, the
' prnkaranasama' reason, when put forward for the purpose of
getting at a certain and definite conclusion, cannot .lead to any
such conclusion, as it affords ideas of the subject as weil as its
contradictory ; aad as such, it could not lead to any conclusion
one way or the other. E. g> in the case of the reasonings : (a)
1
sound is eternal because we do not perceive in it any tran*
sient property/ and (b) * Sound is transient, because we do not
perceive any eternal quality in it,'—we find that the non-pereeptioa of eternal and transient properties in sound having
given rise to a doubt as to its eternality or non-eternality,
there was a consideration of the question; as the perception
of any of the two classes of properties would have decided
the question one way or the other, and there would be no consideration or discussion over the matter. The ' non-perception
<*f eternal properties' is put forward as a reason for infering
its non-eternality; and the * non-perception of uon-eternal properties ' as proving its ' eternality/ And so long as the one
supersede^ aad suppresses the other it cannot lead to the requisite conclusion; as the other is an obstacle to such a conclusiou. Aad thus while a contrary reason is possible, the subject
cannot get to any one (eka) definite end {anta); and this is only
an insfamee of the ' Anaikäntika ' reason, from which therefore
the •* Prakaranasama * cannot be regarded as different. In
the same manner the Kälätayöpudishta also is only a form
of the ' Anaikvntik.i'—as 'eauseduess' exists in Fire which
is the Viptlcska having been perceptibly known to be possessed
of heat (see below, under * Kälätayäpadishta).
The above explanation however is not satisfactory. If the
indicative or inferential potency of the Reason lies only in the
fact of its existing in the aapaksha and not existing in the
while it pervades over the whole of the paksha,

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

427

then there might be the possibility of an opposition or contradiction io the object possessing the property to be proved ; but
even then, the ' prakaranasama' reason, by its very power,
could not but prove what it is meant to prove. If it is unable
to prove, it, by reason of the suspicion of its contradiction, then
the Reason caunot be rightly considered sufficiently indicative
solely by reason of the three facts (of its existing in the
sapaksha «Sec. &c.).^,And it would be necessary to lay down
another uecessary condition for the Reason—viz, that it should
be asatpr^tipaksha, ' without opposition or contradiction'; as
so long as there is contradiction, the Reason is not a true Reason,
aud when there is no contradiction, then it is a Reason. The
same may be said with regard to the ' käldtyäydpadiahta'
reason also. If the three facts mentioned were the only conditions of the true Reason, theu where would be the c anaikdntika*
character of the Reason in the argument—' Fire is not hot, because it is caused' (as the Reason fulfills the three conditions) ?
If it be urged that even though the Fire is caused, it cannot be
believed to be not hot, because of its being directly perceived tp
be hot,—then, the Reason in question could prove its conclusion
when there would be no opposition of direct sensuous cognition, and never in the presence of such opposition; and as such
it would be necessary to lay down another condition for the true
Reason—that it should have its objective such as is not set aside
or negatived (by a superior means of knowledge).
For these reasons, we proceed to meet the objection in a
different manner: ' Pakih<% * (subject) is only another name for
'sädhya' (object to be proved); and a sadhya is that which is
fit to be proved, which deserves proof"or reason ; that for which an
opposition or contradiction is possible cannot deserve proof; and
a thing cannot have two contradictory characters. Heuce the
possibility of opposition must be regarded as a property of chat
which is uot Pahsha. In the same manner that which is contrary
to direct sensuous perception &c. cannot be Paksha ; because
being known in one form (by means of sensuous cognition) it

42S

PKAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10),

caa uever deserve to be proved to have another (contrary) form
Hence we conclude that the ' prakaranaiama' and the 'käläiyaydpddishta* reasons have been' both excluded by the qualification- ' that which is related to the object to be proved;' as both
those reasons are based upon something that has merely a fake
semblance of the character of the ' object to be proved.'
Objection: "Thus too the definition becomes defective,
being too narrow. The Keason is of three kinds—(1) the
anvayi, universal affirmative, (2) the vyatireki, universal negative, and (3) the anvayavyatireki, affirmative-negative. As an
instance of (1) we have—'The vipeshcL is nameable, because it
is knowable, like the. Sämänya'; in this all things,, existing or,
not existing, besides the paksha (vlgeshd) is sapakiha; as whomever the cogniaer, and whatever the means of cognition, there is
nothing that is either unknowable or unnameable ; that which, is
unnameaUle and unknowable for every man, is in absolute nonentity, like the ' horns of the horse'; and any auch thing could
not be either sapakska or vipahsha, as it could have no character
at all; anything that exists however would be the sapaksha ;
and as the Reason could not exist in anything that, would not be
sapaksha, the definition that 'that which does not. exist in its
abhäva * would be too narrow ; as in the case of the argument
in question, no negation would be. possible; and as such the
Reason would not fulfil the condition ' tadabhäve nääti' and
hence would cease to be sufficiently inferentially indicative."
Reply : It is not so; as the Reason does not fail to fulfil,
the condition of affirmation (laid down in the former half of
the definition). In the case of the existence of one thing being
inferred from the existence of another, the Reason lies in affirmation (positive existence); and such a Reason can be set aside
only by the cognition of an instance contravening this affirmation. In the case of the argument in question we find an
' affirmation ' (positive co-existencae) between ' koowabilifcy ' and
' narneabüity '; &s ttve one is alwaY.%fouin<l wh«re the other exists.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

429

We have never met with any case where this invariable concomitance is found to be wanting"; in fact no such case is ever
suspected ; as whichsoever case of a failure here is called up, or
meant to be put forward by the opponent, is always found to
have both nameability and knowability. Nor is there auy
difference ; it is only when there is a vipah<ha that the absence
offailure of conco mitance (i. e. non-existence in the Vipaksha)
can be regarded as the condition of the Reason, and not when
.. the reJs-ttttso lately no vipaksha ; hence kaowability is a sure
indicative of u&ineability.
[Page204.] As an instance oi the (2) vyatireH, Inference, we
liave—* the living body is endowed with the self, because it has
life &c/ In this case every thing besides the palcsha is the
vlpdkiha ; and the Reason is a true one ; because of the absence
of-M\yconnection (of the reason) with the absence (of1 the
paki/ia). In all such substances as the jar and the like; we have
fuuud the absence of life concomitant with the living body \ and
the cognition of this non-presence (of the absence of life; indicates and leals to the inference of the non-presence of the
absence of self (which latter absence is concomitant with the
absence of life).
Objection: «If a thing is not known* then its negation or
absence also-is not known;' as a negation always pertains to
some previous affirmation ; and the self ts sorriething that has
nowhere been known; uader the circumstances, bow' can
we ever be cognisant of its absence inr the jar and other
things.?"
Reply: This argument is not right; because the opponent»
who holds that all things are devoid of the self, is certainly
cognisant of its absence in thQ jar aJso > then as for ourselves,
we have found that the self has the due causal efficiency with
regard to such effects as Buddhi &c, only in livjng bodies-; and.
hence finding the effect, buddhi &c, absent in the jar, we naturally conclude the absence in it oi the self which is capable of

430

PRA£ASTAPÄDA BHÄ8HYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

producing those effects ; just as the absence of smoke leads to
the inference, in certain circumstauces, of the absence of fire
capable of producing smoke.
Objection: "If such be the case, then the self also is well
known to exist in living bodies, as there can be no cognifcion of i
the relationship without the cognition of the^nember bearing •
that relationship; and thus there would be no need for the
vyatireH inference in question; as when an action has been
duly accomplished, any means for accomplishing that action,
appearing subsequently, ceases to have the character of the
means."*
Reply: Not so; as though the self is fully known by us, it
is not known to the opponent, for whom it becomes necessary
to prove it by means of reasons.
Objection: " Nor is there any such restriction as that it
is only the non-failure of affirmation, and not the non-failure of
negation, that can prove a conclusion. Consequently in as
much as the negation also has the character of the Reason,
the definition—* known to exist in that which is endowed with
it'—becomes too narrow."
In reply to this, some people assert that the definition includes the purely affirmative as well as the purely negative
Infereuce, by reason of both being equally known and accepted
in the same system of philosophy." Others explain the definition, taking the various qualifications in it in dtfiferent combinations ; pointing out that the qualification ' that which is related
to the object to be inferred and is known to exist iu that endowed with it 1 applies to the affirmative Inference ; while' that
which is related to the object to be inferred and does not exist
in its contrary' applies to the negative Inference; and the
whole definition applies to the Affirmative-Negative Inference.
The character of" proving what is to be proved' applies to all
the three kind* of Inference; and it serves as the common
* The reading given in the foot note U apparently the better one.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

43{

definition of all Inference, just as of all means of right knowledge the common definition is laid down as ' that which afford*
the cognition of the true object/
Text (103): That which differs from the above-mentioned
' tinga ' in one or both points is not a * Iinga '
(means) in the comprehension of the object to be
inferred; this is what the author of the Sütra has
declared in the Sütra * aprasLdhho'napadeQo'aan
digdhagca ' (Vaiceshika-Sütra III-i-15).
Commentary.
[Pag6 205-] In the sütra, the word * anapadega ' means ' no
Reason/ the word ' apadega' meaning ' hetn! The word ' aprasiddha' is meant to include the viruddha, 'contradictory ' and
asddhdrana ' too special/ Reason; in as much as both these
not being known to be concomitant with the property to be
proved, they cannot have the character of the true Reason.
1
Asat' includes the asiddka, ' not proved ' Reason ; because,
even though such a Reason is known to be concomitant with
the prjperty to be proued, yet it does not exist in the. Subject
having that property ; and as such it cannot be regarded as the.
true Reason. The word Sandigdha ' means the anaikäntika,
* doubtful' Reason ; though this is found to exist in the subject,
yet it is doubtful whether it is concomitant with the property to
be proved, or is devoid of it; and as such it cannot indicate or
bring to view any one only of these two characters; as it is
found to have both these characters.
That with regard to which we have no such notion as that
' this is invariably concomitant with that/—io reference to such
a thing the ' property ' could not be regarded as a true ' litiga/
even though it were invariably concomitant with the ' Subject';
for this purpose the remembrance of invariable concomitance is
a necessary accessory in the inferential cognition of the object
to be inferred ; the author next proceeds to explain this.

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)
Text (104) : The process {of inference) i& as follows:
' Whenever there is smoke there is fire; inhere there |
is noßre there is no smoke *—one who is cognisant §
of this concomitance, when he has an absolutely
certain vision of smoke, he recalls to his- mind
its concomitance (with fire), after which comes the
cognition of the'presenceof fire. (IX-ii-1).
Thus in all cases when one thing is invariably concomitant with another in point of time and place, it
becomes itsx linga.' (IX-ii-2).
In the Vaiceshika Sütra, the author has mentioned ' effect
und the rest,' only with a view to exemplification,
and not for the purposes of restriction. ' How
so V Because we find {Inferences) apart from |
those therein specified. For instance, the fact of
£he Adhwaryu priest repeating' om' is indicative |
of the presence of the" Hotr priest; the rise of the f
möön is indicative of the rise in the sea, and
also of the blooming of the water-lily; the clearness of water in the autumn is indicative of the
rise of the constellation of Agastya.
These and such other inferences are all justified and
pointed out by the expression ' asyedam * {in t}ie
Sütni) which denotes mere relationship {of con- f
comitance). (IIl-i-9 to-14*, 7 and 8).
This Inference is of two kinds: (a) the Drshta and (b)
the Sämänyatodrshta.' The l Drshta' inference is
that where the ' pmsiddha-,' th\at which is already
known (as* concomitant with the ' linga,'), and the
* sadhya,' whose presence has to be proved, belong
absolutely to the same class. As for instance,
when one has seen the dewlap only in the body of
the cow, whenever, on any subsequent occasion, he
happens to see the dewlap, he infers the existence

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

433

of the cow. Wkeny however, the * prasiddha
and the * sadhya' belong to absolutely different
clashes, the inference follows only from the concomitance of the * generic form * of the (linga '
with the * generic form ' of the ' object to be inferred '; and this inference is called the ' SäTtta
v.yatodrshfa' As for instance, having found the
activity of such persons, as th* farmer, the trader
afid the servant* of the king always leading to
certain result<, we infer the fact that, of persons
observing the rites of their respective castes and
conditions alao, the activity\ which is not found
to have reference to any visible purpose, must
tend to definite result*.
In Inference, the l means of knowledge' is the perception of the ' linga,f and the * knowledge * is the
cognition of fire ; or the cognition of fire itself
may be regarded as the rnzocns &n<l the l knowledge ' i« the cognttion of the good or indifferent
character of the fire.
Such is the inference tiiat serves the purposes of on* s
own definite cognition. (II-i-8).
Commentary.
The procees of inferential cogaitioa may be
xpl&ined ;
When a ma a ha* become cogaisaut of the fact of fire existing
wherever there is amoke, and there Wog no smoke when there
is no fire, if be, on any occasion, haa a definite and doubtless
cognition of smoke»—a3 that 'this ia smoke, and not vapour or
any such other thing *; and at the 5^ die time f ho happens to
recall the afonfctaiii iayariahVe. co^OönatanCe of fta and smoke,—
then he ia lad to the mfereaca of fira.
Objection: " If such be the process, toen in this we do
not meet with the «eooud premiss (the minor premiss) (the
'

32

'

$ft
PRAgASTATADA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. Tl. SBCTI0M fM4
'
«-r
.
' j
conclusion being deduced from the »iugle proposition ' wherever
there ia smoke there is are ')«"
Reply: It doe» not matter if we do oot find the minor ,
premiss ; as a matter of fact we do not need it; an infareattal
cognition of the subject of inference follow» only frort the |
perception of the linga and the remembrance of its invariable concomitance. The fact of inferential cognition following •
after remembrance does not make it uncertain as to the point»
of time and place; as the perception of the linga would .
restrict it to a definite point of time and ptaee. Nor would '
the *npanaya' (filinor Premiss) be absolutely ueeiess^ as it
would always have to he brought forward iu the case of inference
for the sake of others, wherein it would »erve the purpose of j
pointing out the fact of the linga belonging to the 'pakvha,'— 1
a fact not indicated by any other factor in the process.
•
Objection : " Well Sir, what is this ' aviväbhäva ' (Invan-:|
able Concomitance) I"
Meply: It \* ' avyabhic&ra ' (noa-failure of concotnitaoce).
Question : " From "what cause doe» this proceed ? "
70 this question, the Bauddhas otfer the following answer:
invariable cooeomitance follows from—(a) identity or coanate- ness, and (b) ' origination/, (i. e. ' fron» the chart eterietic
4<
features of the thing, and from the relation it bears to Hft
«cauae).
|
~i
"Thai is \o *ay, (b) a chance relationship is auch that it |
'* may or may jiot be, there being no restrictive cause. If a cer- |
** lain, property is seen in the sapakiha, and not seen in the )
r" fdkaho', the/Be two fact? alone are uot enough for the recogni- |
" tion of an to variable coiicomita-nce between the two ; HS SUB- j
f4 picton« äs to its^>risting j^p the tipakska will not have b*eu i
"altogether set asi4 ^ Wheojiiowefer, it«, * origination ' i» d»ly"]
" Ascertained, those ^Uepiaiovs; are et,a»ide ;*aa in^ti;« absence j
" of'the cause, tb effect cannot come into existence. The aseer- l
u
t tainment of its origination is a cause in the case, having for i ^

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

435

" instruments tb« five * perceptions and non-perceptions' Tfaes
"five are—(1) the non-perception ' of the effect prior to its origi" nation ; (2) the ' perception ' of the effect on the perception of
#l
the cause; (3) the non-perception of the perceived effect due to
«* the non-peception of the cause (thus of the effect there are
«two * nun-perceptions' and one * perception);' (4) the ' percep*tioQ ' of the cause and (5) the ' non-perception ' of the cause.
« By means of these five ' perceptions' and ( non-perceptions \
f ja, ascertained the fact that' smoke exists only where fire exists,
" and' where fire does not exist smoke does not exist.' The very
« nature of the effect lies in this that it exists only when the
* cause exists, and not otherwise*
[F&g* 2O7-] " (a) The cognition of' identity * also brings about
"the ascertainment of invariable concomitance. Any positive
" entity can never fail to have its characteristic feature ; if it
" did, then it would be devoid of any such nature ; as for the
* ascertainment of identity, it is brought about by the due
" operation of the negativing means of knowledge with regard
"to the vipakska; until there is this operation, even hundred
" cases of concomitance cannot set at rest the suspicion that
" the property in question might exist in the vipaksha. To tins
"end it has been declared—* the ascertainment of invariable
«'concomitance follows from such restrictive agencies as the
"relationship of cause and effect, and the characteristic feature
"of the thing, and not from non-perception,1—i. e. not from the
'•c non-perception' of the property in the vipakska, nor from its
*' perception ' in the sapakska"
Against the above view of the Bauddka, we make the
following observations: Do you mean that—(a) there is * invariable concomitance ' where there are * identity ' and 'origination' ?
or (6) that there are 'identity' and ' origination* when there
in * invariable concomitance' ? (a) The former cannot he
true; as even though, the <*moke 'originates ' from fire,
yet we find - certain - properties of this sndoke—such as its

436

PRA<?A8TAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

I

EoLrthiii€88 and the like—not concomitant with fire ; and even|
though the particular tree is identical with (has the nature of) I
the generic character of the ' tree/ yet there is no Invariabel
concomitance with the particular tree (gingapd ). (b) In thai
cage of the latter alternative, on the other hand, the two conditions of * identity ' and ' origination ' would be indicative only
when the invariable concomitance would be there already ; and!
uuder the circumstances, the concomitance by itself might wel
be regarded as indicative ; what would be the use of f identity
and ' origination * ? Specially as what an * effect' indicates is ntf
merely that * such and such a thing is an effect'; nor does th
' nature ' of the thing indicate that ' it is its nature/; what bot!
0/ these do is ro ipdicate that, such and such a thing does no
fail in its concomitance with such another thing'; and thus th
only cause of indication lifts in the 'invariableconcomitance
and not in 4 identity' or ' origination ; specialty as the causa
efficiency of thqss Utter baa not been found to be l
effectual. Nor does it appear reasonable to asseet that it is uol
smoke itself that is produced by fire, and not the properti«
of smoke—tavthin&ss &c; because a thing is im partit
(and cannot be separated from its properties). Nor hav
we ever had any cognition to the effect that the tbe ' fingi *
tree is identical with (of the same nature as) fche '1
(in general), and that the' tree' is not identical with the givgap
on account of the * $ree in general pertaining to the gingeppa^
well as to the other trees, the Dhava the K/tadira and tbe lik
because there is no real difference between the ( tree' and tl
'gingapä.' For if the j^eneric character of the ' tree/ beii
common to tjxe Dhava, were not identical with the character
the *fvn$apßf then the two could not be one, as a difference]
«attire-is always indicative of real difference ; if however tl
be no cliff^Fence between the two, then, just as the
character of tbe ' tree' is common to all trees, so would
be the general character af the f fwfapä! Nor could a||
ke accomplished by the fact of * connateness'

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIP« AND DISSIMILARITIES.

437

the basis of the relationship of the indicator and the indicated ;
as cona&teness' is baaed upon ( non-difference '; and if oa the
perception of the generic character of the ' gingapa,' there
were no perceptioa of the generic character of the ' tree,* then
where would the necessary ' conuateness' be perceived ? And on
th« other hand, if the perception of the latter were to follow oa
the perception of the former, then where would be the' inference.
It might be argued that,—" the object as it exists, the
generic character of the * gingapd and the generic character
of the * tree/-r»H these are connate (of one and the same nature);
,J sad henoe-when the object wo be perceived, the two generic
characters would also be necessarily perceived; aa has been
declared:—'When an object is seen, all its qua!ties are seen ;
and which part of it would be unseen that could be taken up by
If other means of knowledge V That this becomes a determinate
Jcognition of the ginqipä, and not of the tree, is due to the fact
Jof the non-rememb*ance of the word * tree '; as the determinate
f cognition of the qingapä, brought about by the impression or
recalled idea of the word ' ging ipä,' leads to the Exclusion of
Ijpfc* 'non-fingapi,' and not to the Exclusion of the * n<m-$*w/
If it were not so, then all determinate cognitions would become
mtical. As for the relation of the indicator and tha indicated
[Ulis also belongs to the two Exclusions of Contraries (apokas),
not of the things themselves, as there can be
affirmation
||{or positive cognition) with regard to the thing itself. Then as
ft regards the exclusions of ', e ' non-trse * and the ' *on*
Ifingäpä,' these are distinct from each other, as is shows by
. Hhe fact of the excluded negations being.in the two cases distinct;
;ftiid hence there is ao room for the objection put forward
^against the Bauddha theory."
1;
208] Rtply: How excellent is the ingenuity of thejearaed
in reconciling whatfyasgone before and what is said afterwards 1 \
It has been said before that 'identity* and/coonatenes*' ace tha
rootr of inference, *nd subsequently it is said thattbsre ia a
difareace between the two Saclurions that respectively form the

438

P»A£ASTAPÄDA BHÄS9

—CBAI\ VI. SECTION (10.)

4

object' and the * means * (of inference) t What may thia
derful magic be t
Obj: "There 13 a *connateness* between the
characters of the * tree' and the * cingapd,' and while
remain ' connate/ even though taere is a difference bet
the Exclusions of the ' non-tree' and the ' noa-^incapa,' ttii
:
connaJbeneas' is accepted in accordance with the cognition
idea that we have of them."
Reply: When the ' identity' has been established, the
alone the 'exclusion of the nan-tree* in the ' subject of lit
ference' can be cognised by the exclusion of the noo-c.incap&j
and then the ' exclusion of the non-tree' having been cogni
the * identity' could be established, in accordance with that
nition; and this would involve* a most undesirable interde]
dence.
Obj : "At the time of the comprehension of the inv&rial
concomitance, the two Exclusions are cognised as of th«
nature ; and this establishes their (identity ' or ' connatenessr
Bf&ply : Then, in that case, the ' identity'. of the
tained or cognised exclusion becomes a mere assumption; and
the inferential procass were to be carried on by means of
assumptions, then there would be nothing that could not ha
the chacset *)f the true ( Reason' ; as even for two such
*a ' ka<wability' and non-eternality/ it might be possible to
recognised as having one and the am© nature, and thereby
be regarded as ' identical' in accordance with, that cognition.
Obj : ** In the case of these tw$ terms; in as much as
is BO * exclusion of existence in the ripakska,' there «an be
identity between ' knowability' and * non-etornality.'M
Reply. Tnte; there can be no true identity fcetweea
two ; but there does certainly always exist qp assumed identi
and tt i* such an assumed identity that you would have as the
mean« for the accomplishment of inferences; and under the
the * non-exclusion from the vipaksha' is as good!

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

499

*i aon-existent (i e., of no »vail in the fuifiimeut of tbf
inference).
Then again, between ' identity and origination/ whichever
happens to be cognised, it is the absence of that which cognised, tbrongh the cogaitioa of the non-existence of the 'Reason
ID the vipaksha; becaas-e of its non-perception when it would b*
otherwise quite perceptible. And the non-perception (in the tfi
pn/tska) constituting a factor in the inferential process, operates
either by the cognition of ' identity' with, or the cognition of its
'origination 'from, the ' absence of the peason" in thevipaksha,
-which'absence' too would be provable l»y the said noo-perception.
Then too, the ascertaining of the * identity ' and ' origination *
of that non-perception/ in connection with that which would be
proved by it, would be possible only by means of the cognition
of the fact of its oon-existeuce in the viptksha ; and the cognition of this * absence' would depend upon another 'non-perception;' as every negation is regarded to be an object of non-perception; and thus there being au infinite series of these ne
ceiand non-perceptions, the necessary negation not being established, the 'identity' and the '-origination are not established;
»nd hence either ' nature* or * effect' (correlative« of * identity *
and ' origination ') cannot fie the '
Then agains, we find that in certain cases, even in ib*
absence of any ' identity' or 'origination/ tjhere is a. relation 0/
the inferential indicator and indicated ; as for instance, between
the settiug of the aaterisin of i?rtti&ä*and the rising of thftt of
For these reasons, wo concPade ttfat the assertion that," e©
comitance is due either to the causal relation or to the natnre of
things/' is an ill-considered one. Because the relationship of as
certain thing with a certain 'nature' il permanent, not being do*
to any adventitious cin&umataacea; it is only an aaventitferaft relatiooship that cease« to exist with the disa^earanc* of the ad»
ventitious circumstance ; which cannot be «aid of tb«r natural

440

PRAQASTAPADA BHÄ3HYA-CHA11. VI. SECTION (10.)

relationship. If the relationship of smoke with fire were adventitious, then the adventitious circumstances would certainly |
be perceived ; just as the act of learning following on the
proxi ifcy of ? teacher and the pupil When we h ive perceived it e than once, the smoke and the fire, there would be no
cause for the non-perception of the adventitious circumstances
f any did exist); nor is it necessary that of an object that is
perceived, the adventitious circumstances are always imperceptible. If these adventitious circumstances existed in the
mere forms (of the objects concerned), then too, the con«!
comitance would be duly established; as relationship based
upon that also would exist as long as the o\ jects themselves
existed. Even if the adventitious circumstances were such as^
would come about subsequently, then too, the causes leading'
to them would be cognised. As for the circumstances as welt
as their causes being all super3ensuous (and hencü imparcepti-j
ble), tbis would be too gratuitous an assumption. That smoke
which has no adventitious circumstances wou)<i, at certaio
times, be cognised independently by itself Ixs the case of fire
we find that having been cognised as related to smoke through
an adventitious circumstance in the shape of a particular kind]
of fuel, it is thought of as 'smokeless ' when found supplied
with dry fuel (which doon not give rise to amoke) ; but it is not*
so in the case of the «moke whiob i* never perceived as ßreUssj
(apart from the fire). Thus then, the adventitous circümittan-J
ces being" oka perceptible character, when they are n«»t perceiv-i
ed ttiey are taken as non-existent; and the particular subsequent conditions of thg iel that would be perceived at that
time, when seen over and over again, woull show that there is
no concomitance ; and that would prove that the character of j
the true Reason is oot present in the case in question *|
and hence ail points of time and place having been brought;
into the case, there is no baim done by the perception of the
Absence of adventitious ciremittances. Having ascertained the
concomitance, based upon their very nature, of the generality!.'

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

441

of 'smoke' with the generaKty of 'fire by means of the
final sensuous cognition, from which all doubts and contradiction
have been set aside, and which is aided by the impression left by
the previous perceptions of concomitance,—we come to form an
idea of the invariable concomitance of the two things, in the
form that ' this is invariably concomitant with that/ Though
mere concomitance is cognised at the very first sight of the two
objects, yet the necessity or invariability of their concomitance
is not recognised by a single perception. Because the in variability does not/follow from mere concomitance.; it follows from
such concomitance as is independent of all adventitious conditions! and the independence from such conditions is recognised
poly by means of repeated perceptions (of the two objects) ;
hence we conclude that the invariable concomitance is ascertained by the determinate sensuous cognition appearing by the
force of the perception of concomitance.
This explanation meets the following question also :
" Sensuous cognition pertaining to such objects as are perceived
at the present time, how could we perceive any invariable
concomitance in the case of past and future objects?"
This invariable concomitance we do not hold to inhere in
any particular individuals only ; it is only when we do not take
any account of any particular individual, and cognise the invariable concomitance as referring to the ' generalities '. of the
objects concerned, that we have a certain cognition of the concomitance in all cases; the reason being that the generality
is in all cases of one and the same form.
[Page 210 1 Question : " Then particular individuals do not
enter into the invariable coucomitance ?"
Answer : Who says they do not enter into it ? All that
we mean is that they enter into it in their generic, and not in
the individual forms. It is for this reason that whene* a
man sees smoke, be has in his mind the idea of fire in

442

?2ACA37AP&B>Ä 3HÄ8ffTA~CHAP. VI. SECTION (19).

|

general ; and hence it w fire in general, and not any particular!
fire, of which he has the inferential cognition.
1
The* invariable concomitance having in all cases, been
ascertained in the generic form, if persons were to raise doubt«
without any authoritative reasoning, then, in the case of yoorj
theory also, even though the individual smoke and fire would?
be directly perceived by the eye, and the causal relationship
between the two would be duly comprehended,—even then,:
(at the time of inference) the difference of time and placej
(from those of the previous perception of smoke and fire) might
give rise to äoubta, which would eertainly put a stop to the
operation or functioning of the inferential process.
I
Says the Bauddha: " What is ascertained by repeated
observation is the causal relation (and not invariable con*7
comitance) (between fire and smoke) ^ as a single perception"
would not set aside the suspicion of the smoke being due toj
certain adventitious conditions'(and not to the fire itself); and;
the repeated observation pertains to the Generality; as indivi
duals have but momentary existence» and as such could not
be seen more than onee. Hebce we conclude that the causal
relation, ascertained in #ne instance with reference to the gene*
raiities of the * exclusion of non-smoke ' and the ''exclusion of
Don-fire/ comes to be recognised as universal, the generality
beiag one only.M
But it it in similar manner that we explain the cognition
in all cases of the universal character of the invariable concomitance ; and what are the reasons for your dislike of. our
way of explanation ? In reality, in the case of your theory, the •
two9objects that are amenable to sensuous .cognition could:
never have the caosal relation pertaining to* their generalities,
a* the objects are (according to you) non-entities. That is, to say,
thu iodtvtduat objects (according to you) are mere non-entities ;;*
anaitiftia connection with individuals that all relations are
directly-• perceived by the senses; nor is it possible for all past:

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

443

and fa tu re individuals tobe recalled to the mind*; because i£
the mind were to operate towards external objects independently by itself (without the help of the sense-organs), then
there would be no bliudness or deafness &c. Thus then, the
causal relationship being reoognisfed with reference to the individuals that are seen, there could be no resultant inference
with regard to those that are not seen; as certainly those that
are not seen are different from those that are seen. Nor again
it any relationship of the proof (mea.ua) and the proved >(l
object) possible among individuals; as individuals as such
are not related to one .another (by any such relationship a«
would establish an invariable concomitance between them).
Nor can the individuals be comprehended under a single
generality ; as there can be no relation between, that which is
a real object (the generality) and ttiat which is not (the individual, according to the Bauddk't) ; and if unconnected things
were to be comprehended or included, there could be no restriction, and anything might be included in anything.
For these reasoos, we do not know what is the objective of
the ascertainmeut of * origination f—the ascertainment brought
about by sensuous cognition,—on which would be based the
inferential process (as explained by the Biuddha).
Thu* », we net that one thing is the ' lingo,,' or inferential indicative, of anothe when the two are invariably concomitant in, time and place, S. g. Smoke is the lingz of fire.
The seose of this is that when a thing is found tobe invariably
concomitant, in time and place, with the 'property to be
proved/ it becomes the inferential indicative of this latter. As
for instance, the guarding of barley fields in Kashmira, by
persons in charge of gold, is indicative of the fact of gold being
produced in the watei ays in barley fields (this is an instance
of concomitance in place). Similarly as aa instance of ooncomi
taooe in time, we have the morning songs and music in the
nouses of the PrdgjyotUhas, which are ia&Cifcive of the riling of the king.

444

PRACASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

|
J
Objection:—" U the indication be only by concomitauces o£
time and place, then this would be contrary to the declaration,
of the Sütra to the effect that—'such things are indicative as'
are either effects, causes, conjuncts, contradictories and io*|
herents of another thing.' "
jf
[Page 211 ] Reply : In the Sutra &c. The 'causes' &c arej
mentioned in the Sütra only by way of showing of what charact-j
'• limgas ' generally are ; and it does not mean that there are]
öäiy so many kinds of ' lingo.' and no more.
1
To the question—' how do you know this?'—the author re*^
plies—Vyictirekadar-fanät. That is to say, we cannot regard *
the enumeration as exhaustive, because we fiud inferences in-|
dependent of the relationships enumerated. Tbe author cites]
instances of such inferences*
f
1
(1) The Adhvaryu priest &c. It is laid down that thf
Adhvaryu priest should repeat 'omf to the Hotr priest and to
none elee ; hence one who is cogniaaut of this, when he hears 'ora'
repeated by the Adhvaryu, he infers the presence of the Hotr,
who may be behind the w»Ils; and her« the Adhvaryu is neither
the 'cause', nor the 'effect', nor the 4coujunct', northe 'contradictory' nor the 'inherent', of the Hotr.
(2) Another instance is cited ; The ri&i of the xhoon Ac%
When the moon me», the sea rises in tides, aud lilies bloom; and
one who knows of these natural phenomena' always infers the
ri^e of the sea and the blooming of the lily, whenever he sees
the moon appear; and the rise of the moon is not the effect of
the riee of the sea &o; as tbe 'rising* of the moon consists only
in its contact with a particular point in space, and this contact
ke only the effect of a certain action of the moon, and not of any
action of the sea Nor ig it the cause of the rise of the sea, or
of the blooming of the lily; because the 'rising of the sea* conista only in the rising of the waters, and the blooming consists
in tbe separating of the petals of the flower; and both these acts
can be due only to the action of certain causes that may be in

QUALITIE8 : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

445

close proximity to the objects concerned (i.e., the water and the
lily).
(3) The clearness of water in the autumn is indicative
4fj the rise of Agastya; because it is never found at any other
time.
Objection: " If we have fingas even apart from the ' effect'
&c, then the Sütra cannot be said to apply to or include all
" lingas"
/
others are justified &c. That is to say,
mil Bocii lingas as we find in the instances just cited, are included
in the clause 'asyaidam in the Sutra, which denotes mere
relationship. The another of the Sütra has said 'asyaidairC
in view of. the objection that, "one object cannot be the lingct
of another, as that
lid lead to a great confusion;" and v/hafc
he means is that it does not matter whether one thin' the
iioga) is tile same as, or different from, the other (the su ject),
all that is necessary is that the one should be related to the other ;
and thus there can be no confusion ; as it cannot be tha every
thing would be the linga of any thing; but only that which in
related to the other thing would be its tin9a.
It has been said that that whioh is iu variably concomitant
w something else in point of time or place, is its linga] and
obversely, that which is invariably nonconeomitant with another
cannot bu indicative of it; as It would be possible for it to exist
in other places.
We do not mean that the words of the Sütra 'Asyaidam
t&ryam etc. do not denote tha fact of the two being related
to each other; all that we mean is that the relation« mentioned
in the Sütra are simply by way of examples and are not meant
to be exhaustive; it is necessary for the teacher to explain
a general law always with reference to certain concrete instances ; and it is as a few concrete instances that the Sütra has
spoken of the relations of "cause" and the rest.

446

FRA$ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI, SECTION (10.*

213] The author next proceeds to describe tbe different -;
kinds of Inference, tt is of two kinds etc. The wotd fca' has a |
restrictive force, meaning that Inference is of two kinds only. 3
(1) Of those two, the ' drehfa ' is that which follows upon the
absolute identity, in kind, of that which is known from before ft« |
concomitant with the iinga, and that which bad to be gol at f
by means of the inference in question. E, g. having seen the |
dewlap in the cow only, we have the inferential recognition of
ftn animal with the dewlap seen on some future occasion being
a lcovf. In this case we see that on the former occasion the
dewlap was seen to exist in an animal that belongs to the class .,
'cow; and that leads us, on the subsequent occasion of our seeing Jj
the dewlap, to infer that this dewlap too must belong to
an animal that belongs to the same class ; and this kind of
inference is called * Drsk(atiZ seen,—the name being due to- the 1
fact" that the generality of ' cow' that is inferred, on the latter i
occasion in the forest, from the sight of the dewlap, has had its {
specific individuality 'seen' in the city on the farmer occasion. j
(2) The Samdnyatodrshfa inference is that where tbst
which is already known as concomitant with the Iinga am}
that which has to be inferred belong to two distinct classes;
that is to say, that Inference is the Sämänyatodf8k(a which
follows from the invariable concomitance of the generality of
the Iinga with tbe generality of the Object of Inference.
For instance, having seen that the activity of the fanner, the
trader and the king's servants always bring about certain
results, we infer that the activity of such persons as perform the
rites and duties of their castes must also lead to definite
result». We find that the activity of the farmer brings about
the result in the shape of a rich harvest; and that of the trader
and the King's servants brings to them a mass of gold and
jewels, horses and elephants; and this leads us to infer that the
performance of the rites etc., also brings about result« in the
shape of heaven and the like.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

44*

The followers of Brhaspati (the Athekts) hold that we
have never found any auch result as Heaven necessarily following after any action; and heuce the result of these rites etc.,
must be held to be the mere obtaining of a living. In opposition to this, the author adds—the activity which is- not found
to have reference to any visible purpose etc. It canuot be doubted that there are seme people who, without the least desire
for any visible results, betake themselves to such observances
as those of the ' VäTiaprastka' and the like; and what we seek
to prove by the/inference in question is the fruitful character
of such observances; and aa such it cannot be regarded as a
mere repetition of the former inference.
The word 'Pramvna* has been explained as that which
is the means towards a certain end ; erod as this character could
not be complete without a definite result, the author proceeds
to distinguish the means from the result
The 'perception of
the linga* is the means of knowledge.* That it is to say, it is the
perception of the linga by means of which the inferential cognition is obtained, and tbe 'cognition/ brought aboat by that
means is the 'cognition of fire' (in the case of the inference of fire
from the presence of smoke). Though in regard to tbe origin1 of
the cognitions of the linga and the lingi (that which is concomitant with the linga), there is a difference in the objectives of
the two cognkioua, yet, inasmuch a cognition of the linga
has a certain action t«>«*?tr«U the bringing about of the
cognition of the fingt, th*t can in any way, be said to
have the lingi for its objective , and hence the 'means of knowledge1 and its ' result' remain co-ex tensive (pertaiuing to the
same objective'
[F&gfc 212] Another expinnation is given : Or the cognition of
fire may be regarded as the ' means of knowledge ;' and in that
case, the character of the ' result ' would belong to the cognition
of the (1) good, (2) bad or (3) indifferent character of the Aretha ' goodness ' of fire consisting in its being a cause of pleasure,

448

PRAQASTAPÄ'DA BHÄ8HYA—CHAP. IT. 8KCTI0tf (IQ.)

^

badness in hs leading to pain, and that of indifference la its
being a a iree of neither pun nor pleasure ; the idea o|
these is the ( result' became they appear only after tW
cognition of fire.
All this refers to inference for the sake of one's own definitive cognition, in the word 'niciita* the affix has the abstract;
signification.
Text (105) Word, and the other means of knowledge}
are included under l Inference '; because of the
process of those being similar to that of Inference,
Just as for one who is cognisant of _.__,.
. invariable concomitance, there arises, from thi
perceptxov. of an undoubted * linga' and the re*
membranes of another concomitance, an infereni
cognition of superserisuous things,—so in
the same manner, does cognition arise from
Word &c. also. Scripture even in the form
of Qrncis and Smrtis depends upon the
authoritative character of the speaker; as the
authority if the scripture rests upon his authority
And that Word is nan-eternal is proved by
inference:—* the creation,' of a sentence is due M
an intelligent action,' and * the word daddti vfe
the Veda is preceded by intelligent action ikcauseÄ
of its being spoken of as daddti {Vai^eshik
Sutras 77-c-l & 3).
Commentary.
Qu€*tion: " Philosophers have spoken of othor means, or,
forms, of knowledge—snch as Word (or Verbal) and the like—|
(besidesBenaaonscognition and Inference); how then ia itthatj
theae others have not been mentioned here ? "
J
In answer to this, the author proceeds to show tjiat fcbeae
other mean8 of knowledge are not mentioned for the simple:
?ea«on that they are all included in the two that have been'

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES,

44?9

described. ' Word * and the rest do not differ fro» Inference,
because the process of cognition by tbose means is similar to
the process of inferential cognition. That is to say, just as the
Inferential process functions through invariable concomitance so
do Word &c, also ; the verbal cognition is inferential in its
character,—as it takes cognizance of objects by means of invariable concomitance—like smoke.
The author proceeds to show the similarity of the inferential
and verbal processes of cognition. When the man who knows
the invariable concomitance (of smoke with fire) happens to
see smoke rising in a certain place, and then comes to recall in
his mind his previous kuowledge of the concomitance that
wherever there is smoke there is fire also,—then be has an
inferential cognition of the thing (fire) not directly perceptible to
the senses; and the process is the same in the case of verbal
and other cognitions also. As a matter of fact, we know that a
word never denotes anything until it is known for certain
that it never fails in its concomitance with such denotation;
and when it does denote an object after the unfailing concomitance has been ascertained, it becomes an inferential Vindicative '
pure and simple.
Against the above, some people put forward tbe following
objection: " In inferential cognitions what is cognised is a
certain object qualified by the ' property to be inferred ' (the
"s&dhya). What would be such an'object'in the case of
" the inference of the denotation from tbe Word t The
•• denotation itself could not be this ' object/ as it is not
" known at the time. If the Word be regarded as that * object,'
w
then what would be its ' sddhya' ? Mere ' denotability '
" could not be this (addhya ; as between the Word and its
" denotation we caanot detect any such relationship as that of
" Conjunction or Inhereoce, which is perceptible in the case of
" the mountain and the fire ; aud hence the word as qualified l>y
" the denotation could not be the object to be inferred, as the

450

PKAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSH? A—CHAF. VI. SECTION (10.J

** only relation that there is between the Word and its denota-••'%
" tiou is that of the ' denoter and the denoted ' ; and this come» f
"after the word has signified the object, and not before that
"signification. Nor is there any strict anf&iliug concomitance
" between the word aud its denotation, as there is between fire •
" and smoke ; for the simple reason that we do not find both
" appearing at erne and tbe same place and time [the word is
" oftea heard without the hearer having any idei of the object
"signified by it, aud the object is kuown even, without its |
" significant word being kuown]. For iustance, even though 1
" there is no Ywihi&thira living iu the present Kali age, yet we g
lf
Had the word * ymlhisthira' beiug used (this with regard to J
" time), and even though there is no Lanka in Jambitdvip*
" (India), yet we find the word * lankd' used iu India (this with \
" refereuce to place). Thus then, iu as much as we find the j
" accessories of verbal cognition to be of a character qiwte •
" differeut from chose of inferential cognition, the two cannot I
" be regarded as one aud the same.
1
u

Then ag*in, verbal cognition cannot be regarded as the!
" same as inferential cognition, because of the fact that im differ-f
" ent countries one and the same word signifies different things;i
" aud thus there is no such invariable concomitance between thel
" word aud its deuotatiou, as there is between 6moke and fire;
*' for instance, the word ' cora' is found among tbe people]
"of the south, to be used as a name for cooked rice, though'
"among the people of Äryävarta (India to tbe north of the11
Viudüyä range) it is used for thief. If verbal cognition were
" the same as the inferential, then it would, like the latter,
w
be duly cognised ouly when there would be present tfbe three
u
conditions of Infereuce (described in Text 104), and it would
" not be ba^ed upon the cognition of the fact of its having
" been uttered by a trustworthy person. As, however the
'• authority of verbal cognition is based solely upou the fact
" of its originating from a trustworthy sourte, it cannot but

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

451

" be regarded, on account of this very dissimilarity, as wholly
" different from inferential cognition."
To the above we make the following reply : When the
fore-finger i« raised, there appears an inference of number ten
with regard to things not present at that time and place. And
in this case too, the number is not the 'subject' (dharmi),
as it is not known ; nor can the particular position of the forefinger be regarded as the ' subject; as it is something that is
being m^ide cognisable at the time, and as such having no other
relationship with the number ten, could not indkjate anything qualified by that number. Nor is there any coevality or
co-exteu.si vfeoes8 between the raisiug of the finger aud the ten
thiirgs. How then do you account for the process of inference
in this case? And yet we find that in the usage o$ tradespeople there is an unfailing concomitance between that particular positiou of the forefinger aud the desire of indicating the
number ten,
Obj: "The gesture becomes indicative of the number ten,
through the- recognition (on the part of tke observer) of the»
intention of the person (making the gesture) to convey an idea
ofthat number fand this coucomitance is the basis of the inference)."
Reply ; The same may be said with regard to verbal cognition also. As in the first instance, when the word ' go ' is
uttered, we come to recognise the fact that the speaker wishes
to indicate a certain animal with the hump &c;—this recognition being due to our haviog found that the utterauce of
the word ' go,' in its own turn, is preceded (originated) by an
intention of speaking of that animal; and this intention leads
to tho inference of the animal. The inferential argument
would be in the following syllogistic f<irm :—' The subject, marc,
is endowed with the intention of speaking of the animal with
the hump &c,—because he is the proaouncer of the word ' go,*-—
like myself.'

452

PRApASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VT. SECTION (10.)

Obj : '* la the case of the untrustworthy person, we fiadj
that they often have the inteotiou of speaking of things that
have no real existence; and heuce the mere presence of the
intention cannot indicate the existence of the object (there
being no actual unfailing concomitance between the two) V* "]
Reply : How too could there be an indication of the object
by means of the word itself ? As words are often used byj
mistake, or with the intention of cheating (hence there can be
no certain relationship between the word and any object).
Objection : " The object is cognised only when the word is
uttered by a trustworthy person (m whose case there is no
chance $f either mistake or an intention of cheating)."
.
Reply*. This comes to the same thing as to assert that the
cognition of the object is due to the intention of the trust«
worthy person to speak of that thing.
[Page 215 ] It has been urged by the opponent that," evenij
though the word may be indicative of the object, yet the concomitance between the two (äs we find when one and the same
word is used in different countries) is not quite unfailing, as thera
is that between the smoke and the fire." In reference to this we]
have the following reasoning : As for the smoke, it is indicative!
of the fire by its natural (inborn) relationship to it; as for the|
word, on the other hand, it becomes indicative,. like a gesture,!
only when used in accordance with a certain convention made by|
the wish of the persons concerned; and as such it becomes^
through the ' intention of the person to speak ' of the thing, indicative of only that thing with regard to which the said conventiou has been fixed ; as the object having been definitely!
cognised, as in the case of Gesture etc., only in accordance witt
the word as used by trustworthy persons, it is only when they
word is used by the trustworthy that it has an unfailing coiH
coraitance with the object ; just as it is only when the smoke is
found to rise upwards in a continuous volume that it is indicative
of
fire.
^

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

453

Objection : " Why cannot you assume the fact that the
word denotes the object by direct denotation (without the intervention of conventions or notions of concomitance, etc) ?"
Reply : For the simple reason that there is no such direct
relation between the two ; and if a word were to be denotative
of an object without any relation, then there would be no
restriction as to the denotations of words (any word) denoting
anything). /
Objection : "But there is a natural relationship between
the word and its denotation.11
Reply : It is not so ; as one and the same word is used, in
different countries, in the sense of different things (which could
not be if the word had an inborn relationship wilh any one
denotation).
Objection : " The word may be regarded as denotative
(väcaka) of that thing with regard to which it is used by the
Äryas ; while as regards other objects, in as much as it is
dependent upon convention, it can ouly be regarded vindicative (linga)"
Reply : Not so ; as we find that the word com ' is as
expressive of the thief as of cooked rice (as used among the
Aryas and the Southern people respectively) ; and we have no
reason for making any such distinction as that in regard to the
former, £he word is denotative while with regard to the latter
it is only indkative. Then again, even among the Aryas the
verbal cognition of what is denoted by the word ' cora ' is
preceded by a definite inferential indicative,—because it is a
cognition produced by the word ' cora \—like the cognition
produced by the word ' cora' among the people of the south,
in which latter case both opponents admit the fact of its following
upon an inferential indicative. Nor is there any evidence for
an inborn relationship between the word and the object denoted

454

PfcAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTIÖK (10).

by it. You hold that the only relationship consists in the in
born denotativeness of the word as pertaining to that which isi
denoted, as it is this that pervades over both (the denoter and
the denoted) \ as has been declared—" relationship lies in :
potency ; " and the denotative potency of the word existing
naturally in the denoted object, this object would be cognised
by the man ignorant of the meaning of the word, just as well sa\
by the person who knows the word ; as in both cases, the word,
the object and the relation between them would be equally
present.
\
Objection: " I t is only when the relationship is duly]
known that it becomes the means of the verbal cognition of j
the object, and not when it merely exists (and is uot known). AsJ
has been declared : ' The relationship being the cause of the]
cognition, stands in need of its own cognition ; and hence even:
when it exists, if it is not known or recognised, it does not leadl
to the cognizance of the object (denoted)."
1
[Page $16 ] Iteply : Of what sort is the knowledge of thej
relationship ?
J
Objection : " It is in the form that, * such and such a thing]
is the denoted of such and such a word '."
Reply : Whence does this knowledge proceed ?
I
Objection : " From the usage of old experienced persons."^
Reply : This same knowledge based upon the name and
.the named, when appearing in the boy sitting near older people
talking among themselves, is known as ' sanketa \ ' convention
or ' vyutpatti,'.' knowledge of the word ' ; and this, through
impressions left on the mind, would be the cause of the verbal
cognition of the object (denoted by the word) ; and under the
circumstances, what would be the use of assuming any other
relationship ? The inborn potency of the word constitutes its
' $abdatva,' verbal character \ aud the adventitious (or caused
appearing subsequently) potency constitutes the ' sanketa

QU4I4T1E8 : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

455

'convention ' with regard to k, and also the particular order (in
which it occurs in a sentence) ; and as the cognition of its
denotation would be quite explicable through this twofold
potency, there would be 140 necessity for the assumption of another relationship ; specially as so long as a thing can be explained on perceptible facts, there is no room for assuming
imperceptible ones.
Objection : "If a word were significant only through the
* intention of speaking ' on the part of the speaker, then there
could berno significance in the words and sentences of the Veda
in which case there is no speaker (on whose intention the
signification could be based).1'
In reply to this the author says—the Scripture also in the
form Qrvitis and Smrti* depends upon the authority of the
speaker. That is to say, it is not only ordinary assertions that
siguify their meanings on the strength of the trustworthy
character of speakers ; but the assertions in the form of Vaidila
«pd Srmirta scriptures also are similarly significant; and the
weakness or faultiness of these is due to the deficiencies in the
speaker, and is not inherent in them, like the evil odour of foul
smelling things ; as has been thus declared : * In a word, the discrepancies of the origin, the letter and the rest are due to the
person pronouncing it ; and the word is not deficient by its
nature, like the evil smell of malodorous substances/
Objection: " The Veda being eternal, and as such there
being no speaker in its case, there can be no room for any discrepancies, and thus alone is its absolute authority established;
while if it were the work of an author, we could never
get at an absolutely undoubted authority for it ; as we
find men often making use of false assertions, under the
influence of certain likes aud dislikes/'
Reply : The authority of the scriptures rests upon his
authority. The word ' his ' refers, by the * law of provision,' to

456

PRA9ASTAPÄDABHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

a speaker superior to* ourselves, as described under the sütra
' aimadbnddhihkyo lingamrsheh. Thus the meaning comes
to be that the authority of the Veda is due to the fact of
its having been composed by a person superior to ourselves.
That is to say, its authority is due to the absence of discrepancies,
and not to eternality : for instance,.we find in the case of the
ear and the mind, that though both of these are eternal (the ear
being eternal because it is only alcana), yet they often lose
their authoritative or truthful character by reason of the subsequent advent of discrepancies ; and obviously in the case of the
eye and the other organs we find that even though they are not
eternal, they have authority only when all their deficiencies have
been removed. And we have already proved that there are no
faults or discrepancies in the " superior person " ; hence the.
scripture that is composed by him, must be regarded as authoritative, even though it be the work of a personal author. It is
never suspected that one who sees the reality of things, and is
free from likes and dislikes, when moved by mercy to instruct
the people of the world, could impart wrong or false teachings.
Page 217] Question : " How is it known that the Veda is the
work of a superior person T
Answer : It is inferred from the fact of its sense being
indisputably accepted by all men of various castes and conditions.
If it were the work of an ordinary person, it could not be
indisputably followed in practice by all intelligent persons ; as
we find in the case of the scriptures composed by Buddha and
others ; there would always be some people who would not
accept it as authoritative, and as such not regulate their conduct
in accordance with it. But that with regard to which all men
are agreed (on the point of its authority), cannot but be accepted
as an authoritative -means of knowledge ; as we find in the case
of sensuous cognition. The argument may be thus stated:—
The Veda is authoritative, as it is always found to give rise,
in all men, to non-contradictory eognition, like Seose-perception.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

457

Though it is true that, in the case of certain actions laid down
in the Veda as bringing about a visible result, we often find
that even when the action is duly performed, the result does
not appear,—yet this fact does not set aside the authoritative
character of the Veda ; as this failing is always due to the
deficiencies in the auxiliaries leading up to the result; as is
proved by the fact of the due result always appearing when
these auxilliaries are present in full force.
Objection: *' IMs not right to say that the Veda is composed by ^trustworthy person ; as at the time that the
actiot^laid down therein is performed, even the most learned
-of the performers have no idea of any such author, who would
'be most likely to be remembered."
Reply : That that is non-eternal is proved by Inference.
In as much as it is the ' Veda' or ' scripture' that has just been
spoken oi as having its authority based upon the fact of its
^having been composed by a superior person, we must take tbis
[ * non-eternality' as referring to the same ; and the meaning of
the sentence thus is that, that the Veda is noneternal is inferred
from inferential indicatives.
The author formulates the necessary inferential arguments : (1) The creation or composition of sentences in the
Veda is preceded by, or due to, an intelligent action,—because it
is a composition of sentences—like the composition of ordinary
sentences. (2) The word * dadäti ' in the Veda is due to an
intelligent action,—because it is spoken of as daddtih'—like
the word 'dadäti' used in ordinary parlance.
As for the argument that the Veda is not composed by a
human author, as no such author is remembered,—it is not
based upon sound premises, (1) because the Veda itself has
spoken of an author iu such passages as—* Prajäpati alone
existed, there existed neither day nor night; he did peanance;
and from that pen nance the four Vedas were born &c. &c.y; aod
(2) because we find the premiss failing, in the case of an old

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)
weil for instance [people have no idea of the actual person who
sank the well, and yet that is not take a as a reason for accepting it as not done by human hands].
The non-eternality of the Veda having been thus proved^
we are met with the following difficulty: " In as much as we
often find human assertions to be both (true and false), there
would always be a doubt as to the authoritative or truthful
character of a declaration in the Veda; and under the circumstances, though people might be led by them to activity
towards some visible end, with regard to which he may have not
doubts; but as regards imperceptible (supersensuous) objects,
which are laid down as capable of being attained only by a
vast amount of expenditure and bodily exertion, no intelligent
person would ever betake himself to any activity on their
account, until he will have fully ascertained the authoritative
character :of the declaration pertaining thereto. And in;
ordinary parlance we find that the authoritative character of
an assertion is always ascertained upon the recognition of,
certain good qualities in the speaker ; and this leads us toj
think that in the case of Vedic declarations also any activity iaj
accordance with them would be resorted to with a firm convic-j
tion only after the agent will have become cognisant of the?
good qualities of the author of the Veda."
Some people (the Mlmansakas) meet this difficulty by
holding that, " the authority of an assertion is not due to the
fact of its being spoken by a trustworthy person; all means
of cognition are self-sufficient in their authority."
But to These poople we put the following question : What,
in the first place, do you understand by 'authoritative character ' or * validity ' of the means of cognition, prämänya ? Does
it consist in the unfailing concomitance with the real state
of things 1 or in the bringing about of tlte cognition of the real
thing ? It cannot be the former; for even though smoke
is invariably concomitant with fire, yet we find that a man who

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

459

is not In his 3enses does not bave any idea of fire (at the
s:ght of smoke), aod in this case thus there would be no
'authoritative character' for the inferential indicative (smoke);—
aad also because in the case of the eye we fiad that though it
is not' concormtanfc ' with any one of the colours, blue, yellow
etc., yet it is sufficiently 'authoritative ' in that it brings about
the cognition of real things. If tijen,' authoritative character '
be beltl to consist in the bringing about of the cognition of
rW things, then-we ask (what do you m-ean by saying that it is
'self-sufficient' ? ) Does it mean—(1) that it is known by itself ?
or (2; that it is produced by itself ? or (3) that it operates by
itself? If the authoritative character of the means of cognition
be known by itself, in the form that, ' I am the bringer about
of the knowledge of the real thing/—then, with regard to no
means of cognition would there ever be any doubt as to whether
its objective ii true or otherwise; nor would there be any
Activity following upon mistaken cognitions. And, if on account of the incongruity of the means of cognition operating within itself, it were not to cognise itself, and hence not to cognise
the fact of its bringing about the knowledge of the real thing,
then for the cognition of this, something else, apart from the
coguition, would be needed; as without a means of cognition,
no cognition of the 'cognisable' is possible ; and hence when
the 'authoritative character' of a means of cognition would
be the object to be cognised, it would certainly need something
apart from itself as the means for its cognition ; and thus the
authoritative character would be due to this something else.
OJj. " If the authoritative character of one means of cognition would have to be cognised by another mean3, then this
latter would have to be cognised by another, and so on and on,
there would be an unending infinite series of means upon
means/*
Reply: There would not be any such regresms ad
infirntum ; as it is not absolutely necessary that there should

460

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄ8HYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

always be a desire to ascertaim the authoritative character
of fche means of cognition. The means of cognition points to
its objective, by its mere appearance, and not only after its
own authoritative character has been ascertained. And in
certain cases it so happens that when the objective has been
duly pointed out, there arises, from some cause or other, a
doubt as to whether the means of cognition is valid or invalid ;
aud this doubi as to its validity giving rise to a doubt as to
the reality of the object pointed out, the resultant activity
towards that object does not come about. And for the sake of
the due accomplishment of this activity there arises a desire to
ascertain the authoritative character of the means of cognition:
as until this has been ascertained, the doubt does not disappear.
In a case however, where, either on account of the force of habit
or of the due comprehension of all details in connection with
the object, the means of cognition appears free from all tcunt of
suspicion,—the mere appearance of this means brings about
the fuil cognition of the object ; and the cogniser having ail
his needs thus fully satisfied, there does not arise in his mind
any wish for Ascertaining its authoritative character; and hence
there would be no need of having recourse to another means
of cognition. One who would still fix some suspicion upon
the cognition, on the ground of both sides of the question beiog
perceived, will not be able to attach any such suspicion ; for the
simple reason that all suspicion has been set aside by the fact
of the object having been definitely cognised; as has been
declared by Mandana Älic,ra in his Brahmasiddhi : 'A suspicion
with regard to the cognition ia s-at aside by the cognition
itself/
It may be that the validity or authoritative character of the
means of cognition would be sought after for the sake of the
requisite activity ; but in a case where the activity was due to
a doubtful idea of the object in the mind of the agent who had
not ascertained the authoritative character of the means of

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

461

cognition, when he would be fully satisfied aa regards the
character of the object itself, he would» no louger have any
desire for ascertaining the validity of the means.
Question: " Is then, the usefulness of the means of cognition ascertained on the strength of the resultant activity ? "
Answer: No; as in that case also the activity would
De for the purpose of the testing of the validity of the means
of cognition, just like the testing of the seed by the farmer;
and in such cases there would always be a desire for ascertaining the said validity. When one has doubts as to the validity
of the means of cognition, and having doubts as to the true
nature of the object, betakes himself to activity for the sake
of the due comprehension of that object,—if he gets at this
object he has his purpose fulfilled ;—and as for the ascertainment of the validity of the means of cognition, even though
such ascertainment would not be quite at hand, yet it would be
accomplished by the force of^the object itself; specially as the
force of the resultant activity does not fail in its concomitance
with the validity of the means of cognition.
Thus then, the validity of the-means of cognition is neither
known nor produced by itself. Then alone could we accept
the * self-sufficiency ' of the validity of the means of cognition,
if the cognition, on having been produced, were subsequently to
produce in itself the character of briuging about the cognition
of the real object. As a matter öf fact, however, we find that
the cognition appears from its cause in full possession of the
character of the knowledge of the real object; and as such
we regard its validity to be dependent upon Something else,
apart from itself.
[Page 219] Objection : " By saying that tke means of cognition
is * self-sufficient' in its validity, we do not mean that it produces
its own validity; what we mean is that for the sake of the
production of its validity the coguitio'n does not stand in need

432

PBA£ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA--CHAP. IT. SECTION" (10.)

of anything besides those causes that produce the^eognition
itself.'1
Reply: This too is not the correct view; for if the only
cause of the validity of a means of cognition consisted in the
accessories bringing about a cognition that is neither more nor
less than the exact object,—then whence eould we have any
mistaken cognitions ?
Objection: " It is in the very nature of the causes in question that they bring about cognitions in exact accordance with
objects, and when this nature is disturbed or sec aside by the
presence of discrepancies, then the causes produce cognitions
not in accordance with objects,—while wheu the discrepancies
that tend to disturb the nature are not present, then there
remains the character of bringing about cognitions iu due
accordance with objects."
Reply: Theu, does the correctness of a verbal assertion
follow merely from the preceding cognition of the speaker ?
In that case all assertions would be, correct. If however the
correctness of an assertion were to be produced from the comprehension of the means of knowledge;- then in that case
the validity would be based, not upon the nature of the causes,
but upoo their efficiency ; that is to say, the cause of the wo*d
would be the knowledge of the object siguified by it; and correctness is the efficiency, and incorrectness the deficiency, of this
latter cognition ; consequently if correctness were the cause of the
validity of an assertion, then this valicucy would be based upon
the efficiency of the cause, aud ntffr upon tlie very nature of the
cause itself ; aud if the validity of verbal gnitions were
based upon an efficiency, theu the same would be the case with
the validity of the other kinds of cognition ; as all cognitions
under consideration must be regarded as having their validity
based upon the quality of these causes,—because they are
cognitions of the valid meaus of knowledge,—like the coguitioo
of the meaus of verbal cognition.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES- AND DISSIMILAKITIES.

463

Objection : " In the cas* of verbal cogaitioa also the quality
of the causa may operate towards the removal of discrepancies
and not towards the production of validity."
Jl&ply: Not so; as what the quality leads to is the
stopping of the way of the coming in of discrepancies.
Objection: " We graift that (in the abseoce of discrepancies) there will be no appearauce of the incorrect cognition
which is the Tesuifc of discrepancies; but wheuce would the
wrrectne88--ot^the cugniciou proceed ? What follows from
the absence of the cause, is the absence of the effect, and not
a contrary effect; as this contrary effect consists in the mere
form of the cognition."
Reply: Not so ; as there would be no difference. That is
to say, the only peculiarity that, there is in a cognition is its
relation tor its object; and if this, being fully taken up in the
stoppiug away of the discrepancies, were no help in the
bringing about of correctness, on account of there being no
difference in the forms,—theo there would be no sentence restricted to any particular object, brcause of * nondifference;'
i. e. on account of the uon-accomplishmeut of anything
particular. If it be held that the cognition pertaining to
aa object produces a sentence pertaining to that same object,
then it would be the .correctness of the cognition, and
not its mere cognitiooal form, that would be the cause of the
correctness of the sentence ; and this would come to the same
thing as to hold the validity to be due to the presence of certain efficiencies.
Even if we grant that the presence of the efficiency operates
towards the absence of discrepancies ; even eben, tuat would not
iu any way affect the theory of the*' validity ' of the means of
knowledge being due to somethiug apart from itself; because
whenever this 'validity' would appear we would always find
by negative and affirmative coucomitance» the active operation

464,

PRAgASTAPÄLA SHÄ3HYA-CHA?, VI. 3ECTI0U (13

of the * absence of discrepancies,' which would be somethin
quite distinct from the ' nature of the cause.'
Objection: " The absence of discrepancies is the cause ofj
the absence of mistaken cognitions ; while the validity in q
tion is dependent upon the character of the sense-organ and
other channels of cognition."
Reply: Why cannot you say that the presence of di
pancies acts as an obstacle to the production of validity, an
mistaken cognitions are dependenc upon the character of the
sense-organ etc.?
1
[Page 220-] Objection : " We do not admit this, because as i
matter of fact we always find mistaken cognitions following in
the wake of discrepancies/'
Reply : It would be equally reasonable to hold that, in
much as we always find validity following in the wake of
'absence of discrepancies,1 we cannot assume otherwise,
a matter of fact, there is no valid means of knowledge which
does not stand in need of the previous non-existence and the
utter destructioo of discrepancies.
In the same manner it may be proved that the action \
the means of knowledge in bringing about such effects as the!
agent's activity etc., also is due to something apart from itself,!
and not due to its own mere form ; as in the bringing about of|
the said effects it is always found to be controlled by certaini
external aids and obstacles.
J

(1) By saying that the Veda is the composition of a superior person, the
author do not ascribe the authorship of the Vedaa to any ordinary man ; he
holds God himself to be the author- The Mimdn$aka on the other hand hold«
that the Veda is coeval with God himself, and has no author at all. The latter
rests his belief upon the fact that no person has ever, since time out of mind,
had any idea of any author of «the Veda, as they hare had in regard to such]
other ancient books as the Mahdbharata, the Dharmatütras, etc. The ffaiy&
holds that consisting of a number of sentences, like any ordinary work, the
Vedas could not but have been the work of an intelligent author ; and as the
character of the work precludes the possibility of its having originated from any

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

465

ordinary man, they conclude that the author of the Veda» could have
been no other person than God i/imself. The two viewi are very ingeniously
reconciled by the Vedäuti who holds that though the form of the Veda as we
have it is uonetemal, and as such, like all things in the world) the creation of
God. it is in its essence a mere copy of something that has always existed, and as
such absolutely eternal as to ita substance. The non-eternality of the Vedas is a
v-. Holary to the more geoeral theory of the non-eternality of all sound
(1) The Vaiceshika view of the inclusion of Verbal,under Inferential, cognition
has been refuted by Udayauäc&rya ia his Kusam&njali under the Kärikä * Anai~-h4ntah pariccfäde, tambhavi ca na nirhayah *; that is to say an inference, li
the oue in which verbal cognition is sought to be involved, is not possibl%; as the
cuncluaiou of such an inference could be either a definite cognition or a mere
potability ; iu the former case, the character of the premisses would not be such
as to be able to lead to the desired conclusion ; and in the former as the conclusion would be doubtful, it could not lead to any <frt<ü* definite verbal cognition. (Vide Kusumdnjali, in loco).
(3) The question as to how we are to ascertain that a certain piece of know*
edge is true or false has given rue to much discussion. The different views have
been thus summed up iu the Sarvadarcanatangraha. (I) The Sänkhyaa kold that
validity, as well as invalidity, {3 inherent in the cognition itself ; (2) the Niiyayi«
kas regard • both to b« proved by something apart fromfchecognition ; (3) the
Bauddha holds that while invalidity belongs to cognitions by their very nature,
their validity is proved by something apart from themselves ; and (4) th«
Mimänsaka declares that it is validity that belongs to the very nature of the
cognition ; and invalidity is due to external causes ; i. e. a cognition must always,
be regarded as true until it is proved to be otherwise. The NaiySyika contends
that if a cognition were by it3 nature valid and true, then it would always be
recognised as stich ; and there would never be any doubt as to whether a certain
cognition is correct or incorrect; then again in ordinary experience wefindthat whenever we have a certain cognition, all that we feel is that it may be trne and if, when
acting in aceordance with the piece of knowledge afforded by that cognition, we
find that it corresponds with the real state of things, then alone do we conclude
that it is true; otherwise it is false ; f. i. when the thirsty man perceives water
and moves up to it to have a drink ; if he does come upon real jwater he thinks
his cognition to be true, while if he meets with sand instead, he concludes it to
have been a misapprehension ; and thus wefindthat the validity or otherwise of
the cognition is established by external evidence. And so the truthfulness or
otherwise^of verbal cognition also is proved in aceordance as it may or may not be
found to be in harmony with the real state of things. The NaiySyikas maintain
that the validity of a cognition ia due to the presence of a certain efficiency,
in the organ concerned ; while ita invalidity ia due to the presence of * discrepancy
chiefly in it.

$£$

PBA<?ASTAPÄDA BRÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

Importance has been attached to this discussion because of the way in whid
it affects the question of the self-sufficient authority of the Vedaa ; the Bau
denying ail authority for them and the Naiyäyika and the Vaicceshika <
their authority only in so far as they are the work of the ail wide God.

Text (106): In as much as we find that it is only
to whom the signification of the gesture is Jcno
who has a cognition by means of the gestiav
tion, that cognition must be regarded as
ferential.
Commentary
We find that when the fingers of the hand aredrawo with!
in, it signifies that the man who makes the gesture is calling
someone to himself; and when the fingers are put forward i
means that the man is sending someone away from himself
and some people regard this gesticulatiou to be an i a dependent means of knowledge. Against these people the authc
says : when a man knows that such and such a gesture of tb
hand—e. g.t its contracting or expanding—is meant to con?e|
such and such a meaning, he comprehends these gestures whenl
ever made as signifying calling, sending away and the like;
and as it is only the person cognisant of the meaning of
gesture who has the comprehension, and no other person, we
must regard this cognition by gestures as purely inferential.
Cish'd,' gesture' is regarded as an independent meana of knowledge, by i
Täntrika*.

Text (107). In as much as in. the case of ar<
cognition a trustworthy person describes the i
ya to one who does not know it, through the cow,—|
this must be regarded as a case of Trustworthy
Assertion]
I

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

467

Commentary.
The author now proceeds to show that Analogy is only a
form of Inference. The word ' dpti * means the direct
reaching—i. e., correct cognition ; and one who has this is called
1
dpta' one who has direct cognition of such transcendental
things as dkarma and the like, and who is a teacher or instructor of things which he may have rightly known. When such a
person,—in the pjesent instance, a forester knowing the gavaya—- isasketTby the cifcyman who does not know that animal—
' what sort of an animal is the gavaya 1 *—he describes the
animal through its similarity to the cow (which is known to the
cityman), by saying—* the gavaya is like the cow ;' and it is
the recognition of this fact of the gavaya being like the cow
that constitutes Analogical Cognition; and certainly this is
nothing more or less than a trustworthy assertion; as the
cognition,'that 'the gavaya is like the cow/ is based upon the
authoritative character of the speaker (if the speaker is not
known to be a reliable person, the said cognition fails to
appear); and trustworthy assertion is only a form of Inference
(as shown above). And hence Analogy also is only a form of
Inference.
Some Mirnanaakaa maintain that it is the assertion of the
forester (that 'the gavaya is like the cow') that constitutes
upamdna, ' Analogy;' and for these also the cognition in
question comes to be purely inferential,
IP. 281] The followers of Qavara Srämt (the author of the
M%mai%8ä Bhdshya) hold that when a man who knows the cow
sees the gavaya in the forest, he remembers the cow, and then
he has the idea—f my cow is similar to this animal'; and it
ia this knowledge of similarity that constitutes Analogical
Cognition. And this would be only a case of Remembrance.
Similarity, like Generality, rests in its entirety in each
individual, and it does not extend over both members, like
Conjunction; because as a matter of fact we find that even

468

PRA<?ASTA1»ÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (10.)

when the cow is not before us, we have the idea of the gavaya,
which is before us in the forest, having . the similarity of the
cow (and if similarity extended over both members this would
not be possible as only one of the two is before us); as hat
been said by the teachers of Mlmänsä : ' Similarity, like |
Generality, rests in its entirety in each individual, as, J
we find that even when one correlative is not seen, its 1
similarity (in the other) is duly recognised/ (Qlokavartika).
Even if the similarity always rested in each of the
correlatives ( the cow and the gavaya), so long as the
gavaya had not been seen the man could not have any notion
of its similarity in the cow ; and yet it is only right that simi-;
laxity should be cognised at the time of the proximity of its
substratum (to the person); just as, though while the other,
member of the comparison is not perceived there does not
appear any such idea as that ' this is longer or shorter than:
that* yet as soon as the object with a certain dimension cornesr
before the person, he perceives the dimension all right; if it
were not so, then how could it be that meeting with the othei
correlative at another place, the man should have the idea"
that' this that I see now is longer, or shorter, than the object!
I had seen before T If the similarity in the cow were not cog-|
nised, on the previous occasion, by the mere action of the senses,)
and if, on the present occasion too, it were not cognised in the]
gavaya, then there could be no such restriction as that, on thef
perception of the gavaya its similarity to the cow should bei
remembered; as there would not be any peculiarity in the|
cow or the gavaya whereby the sight of the one should recall^
the similarity of the other.
|
Objection: " The restriction of the remembrance is due <
to the perception in the gavaya of the same general characters;
of possessing hoofs, and tail etc., as have been perceived in the'
cow."
}
Reply: ' Similarity' consists only in the possession by
both of certain limbs of the same kind; and if these common-

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMIDARITIES.

469

alities of limbs are perceived by the perception of each of the
substrates, then similarity would also be cognised; hence on the
perception of the gavaya, the cognition of the similarity as belonging to the cow, uot before the eyes at the time, could not
but be a case of Remembrance, born of the impression aroused by the perception of another object (the gavaya) similar to
the cow ; aod being of the nature of Remembrance, it could not
be regarded as a distinct form of knowledge» We have seen that
even that which is perceived only by non-determinate abstract
perception becotnes-an object of remembrance; as ao ignorant
person (not knowing the word whereby the perception of the
object could become determinate) having seen one of the correlatives on a previous occasion, when he comes to see the other,
he recognises in the latter the commonalities that he had perceived in the former
Some people regard Analogical cognition to be of the nature
of the cognitiou of the relationship of the name and the named
(the denoter and the denoted),—holding that the man who
has heard the declaration that ' the gavaya is similar to the
cow \ on seeing tbe gavaya and finding it to be similar to the
cow, he comes to the conclusion that * the word gavaya is the
name of this animal/
In accordance with this view also, the declaration the * the
gavaya is like the cow' is a sentence; and as it is
this sentence that is held to give rise to the cognition, that ' that which is heard of as gavaya is similar to
the cow/—this cognition cannot hut be regarded as purely
verbal in its character. And as for the cognition of the denotability, of the animal similar to the cow, by the word ' gavaya '
—this is purely inferential; on account of the use of that word ;
that is to say, it could be reduced to the following inferential
form : ' A word becomes expressive of that with reference to
which it is advisedly used by all learned persons,—the word
'gavaya' is so used with reference to the animal similar to the

470

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHlSHYA-CHAP, VI. SECTION (10.)

|

cow, by the forester,—therefore that animal is denoted by the '
word ' gavaya.'
.1
The cognition of similarity in the gavaya is distinctly |
sensuous in its character. Then as regards the cognition of
the animal as apart from all other things in the world, that :
too is a resultant of sensuous cognition. As (or the recognition |
of the relationship of the name and the named, that is a case j
of Remembrance, being born of the impression left by the |
cognition of the denotability by the word 'gavaya' of the!
animal similar to the cow, brought up by the previously bornl
commonality, manifested by the comprehension of similarity; 1
just like the recalling of the denotability by that word, of an-J
other object of the same, class as the one with regard to which|
the conventional signification, by the word, of the commonality |
has been cognised in one instance,—and the impression left by|
which cognition is the cause of the said recalling; as the re-1
calling is in the following form : 'ifc was'of the same animal |
tbat I had comprehended the denotability by that word, on the']
previous occasion;' and iu this there would be no room for
Analogy (and as such this cannot be regarded as an instance!
of Analogical Cognition).
J
As for Presumptive Cognition, it is based upon the ap4
parent inconsistency of some fact tbat is directly perceived or
heard. The opponent (the Mimansaka who regards Presumptive Cognition as an independent form of knowledge) has proved'
the usefulness of the separate mention of the word * heard ' in
this connection ; and has thus shown that there are two kinds of
Presumptive Cognition—the Drshfärthäpatti, based upon the
apparent inconsistency of what is directly perceived, and the
Crutärtkä'patti based upon that of what is heard. That is to
say, wh^ro a thing that is perceived is found to be inconsistent
without something else, it indicates or leads to the presumption of this latter ; and this is a case of the former kind ; e.g.% in
the case- of the information that' Caitra who is alive is not in the
house,' the absence of Caitra in the house is cognised by means

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AKD DISSIMILARITIES,

471

1

of Negation ;' and the information aa regards his being alive
indicates the possibility of his presence in the house, as a living
person is generally found living ic houses ; but it is not possible
for the same person at the same time to be both absent and present in the house ; as presence and absence are mutually contradictory and exclusive ; and thus the absence would be wholly
inconsistent with the information regarding the man being alive,
if he did not exist somewhere outside the house; and as & rule
that which is inconsistent implies that whereby it ceases
to be inconsistent; and as the absence in the house of the
liviag Caitia_jBf0ula never cease to be inconsistent unless
he existed outside the house; the inconsistency of the
absence in the house is in view of the fact of his
being alive; and this inconsistency ceases when Caitra is
recognised as existing outside; in this case there are two
cognitions—(1) ' Caitra lives,' and (2) ' he is not in the
house, being outside *; of these one has some room elsewhere
while the other has no room ; and when these two are found to
be mutually contradictory, the inconsistency «f that which
has no room leads to the other being taken as pertaining to
something else; and the removal offcheirinconsistency constitutes
the basis of Presumptive Cognition. Sometimes it so happens that
on seeing one correlative which pertains to a definite place, etc.,
we remember the relationship which brings about the cognition
of the other correlative; and this cognition is purely inferential,
differing from Presurapiive Cognition in the process of its
appearance ; as lias been declared : 'In Inference the necessary
condition lies in being born from concoviitance, while Presumption is totally different, operating solely through negation.'
We have an instance of the other kind of Presumptive
CognitioD, the Qrutärthäparti, where the inconsistency of one
assertion indicates another assertion. E. g., the assertion that
'fat Devadatta eats not in the day 'leads to the presumption
that' he eats at night* which sentence takes the place of the
latter half of the former sentence.

472

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄ8HYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

The author now proceeds to show that the Drshtärthäpatti
is only a form of Inference :—•
[Page 223] Text {IDS) : The Presumptive Cognition of
thing based upon a fact of perception is only ' Inference per contraries'\ and that based vpon
verbal cogni tion is an ' Inference per Inference'?
Commentary.
The expression ' ddrgärtärtha ' means that which is
directly perceived by means of the five means of knowledge^
(the sense-organs); and the arthäpatti' the ' presumptive cognM
tion ' of a thing based upon such direct perception is a case of;
' Inference per contraries.' That is to say, the character of the
' inferential indicative ' is in accordance with the nature of the1
invariable concomitance (upon which the inference may bebased) ; and in the casein question what is invariably con-<
comitant with the thing to be inferred is what is contrary
the cognitions by other means of knowledge ; and hence in this
case the 'inferential indicative * is what is contradictory. For
instance, if absence from the house were to indicate existenci
outside by mere 'inconsistency/ then it might as well indicate
other things also ; as therewould.be nothing to limit the scope1
of this iudication.
Objection ; " Bat it is for the sake of establish ing its consistency that absence from the house indicates something else;;
and nothing else except outside existence could make it coo&is-i
tent (and hence it could not indicate anything but the outside]
existence)"
Reply: By whom has it been asserted that absence:
from the house is made consistent by outside existence t.\
In fact we declare that even when there is outside existence,
absence from the house is as inconsistent as ever.
I
1
Object: "We have often seen that when a thing is of a'
limited extent, if it is in one place, it is not in any other place y
e. g. when the sun is seen either in the ea3t or in the west, it is >

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

47g

not seen on the other side; and similarly from a directly
perceived fact we learn that the absence from the house of the
living Devadafeta is possible or consistent only when he exists
somewhere outside of it."
Reply : Well in that case the cognition of outside existence
is preceded by, and follows from, a cognition of invariable
concomitance; and thus Presumptive Cognition being bora
of invariable concomitance would', be purely inferential. Theo, as
for the assertion that, it is an inference that operates by
contrariesv it is only meant to show the distinctive feature of
the inference4n—the-crcae". The inferential argument would be
stated in this form ; * Devadatta exists outside,—because though
living, he is not found in the house,—like ourselves/
The author next proceeds to show that the Presumptive
CognitioQ based upon verbal cognition is also include in Inference : The cognition that Devadatta eats at night, following from
the verbal coguitioa of the assertion * fat Devadatta eats not in
the day/ is a case of ' inference per inference'; as in this case
the assertion, serving as an * inferential indicative/ Iead3 to the
inference of fatness^ which, in its turn, leads to the inference
of its cause in the form of ' eating at night/
The sense of all this is as foltows : The * inconsistency' of
a means of knowledge lies in its incapability to bring about the
cognition of its objective; and the assertion * he eats not
during the day' ia found to be quite capable of expressing
what it is meant to express; and as sucb where would lie its
'inconsistency' (on which you seek to base the presumptive
cognition of eating at night) ?
Objection: " Fatnese, the effect of eating, would not be possible without eating in the day, because of there being no cause
for the fatness ; and this impossibility would make the assertion in question also inconsistent; as it is not in keeping with
the real state of things."

474

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CRAP. VL SECTION (10.)

Reply : Then, in that case, the ' inconsistency ' of the a
sertion would lie in the improbability of its meaning» and it*
* consistency' in the probability of its meaning ; and there would
be QO * consistency ' or ' inconsistency * in the assertion itself;
and the * meaning' or object of fatness of one who does not eat\
in the day, being an effect of eating, becomes * consistent' ort
probable by reason of the 'meaning ' or object in the form oL
eating at night, and not by reason of the assertion that' he
eats at night;' and thus what the ' inconsistency ' or impro*|
bability of the object needs, for the justification of itself and
its expressive sentence, would be an object, and not a sentence;
as a sentence could nob justify the inconsistency of an object^
And the object that is justified is cognised by means of an:
object; as, in the case in question, the object in the shape ofi
the fatness of one who does not eat in the day is found to be j
unfailing iu its character of being the* effect of eating at nighth
and hence there can be no Arthdpatti (presumptive cognition)
amenable to verbal expression.
;
i
Objection * " It is quite true that an object is justified by an!
object; and it is by this justification of the object that the word
expressive of it is also justified ; but a verbal object is justified
only by a verbal object; as anything cognised by other means
of knowledge could have no concomitance with a verbal object;
for instance, when the verb 'pacati* * cooks/ is uttered, its deficiency due to the absence of the objective is not removed by
the sensuous perception of the cooked grain ; as even though this
grain is perceived, the verbal deficiency of an objective for the
verb 'cookä* remains just the same. When however the objective is brought forward by mean9 of a word, ('kaldyam ') tbe
definite cognitiou comes forward in its entirety, in the form
1
k'jiläyam paenti ' (cooks tbe hdlaya grain) or ' gatcam pacati'
(cooks vegetables). In the case of the sentence—'fat Devadatta
eats not in the day '—also we have the deficiency or inconsistency of what is expressed by the sentence ; and hence this deficiency could be removed only by means of a verbal object

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

475

and hence what the ' apparent inconsistency ' in the case needs is
a sentence expressing the fact of eating at night; otherwise,
in as much as the denotations of the words composing the sentence expreasive of non-eating in the day could have no connection with the eating at night, and as the apparent inconsistency would re3t in the sentence (verbal expression),feheobject,
in the shape of eating at night, could never become an object
of Presumptive Cognition; specially as it would form an object
of verbal cognition (by means of the sentence * he eats at night').
Nor can it be argued tbjati;' the sentence (expressive of eating
at night) couldTnotTbe indicated either by the sentence expresfive of non-eating in the day, or t>y this non-eating itself,—as
there would be no proximity between these and that sentence/
M

Nor would it be right to argue that—' in as much as
neither the sentence eats not in the day, nor its meaning, has
any kind of proximity to the sentence eats at night, the
former two could not in any way indicate this latter ?
Because through the proximity to them of the meaning of
the latter senteuce, there would be a proximity of this latter
sentence also. Nor is the proximity absolutely necessary, in
presumptive cognition, as it is in the inferential; as the
former operates through (is based upon) mere inconsistency»
To this effect it has been declared— ' The meaning (that the
fat person eats not ia the day) does not directly indicate
the other meaning (that he eats at nigkt); for the simple
reason that while the former is an object of verbal cognition
(by means of the sentence uttered—the fat person eats not
in the day) the latter is not amenable to any expressive
operation of tbaft sentence. That such is the case is apparent
from the fact that until the person has a conception of other
words (* he eats at night') he has no idea of the words uttered
(' the fat person eats act in the day ' ) having any significance (with regard to the meaning that the person eats at night)
• The reading apptars to be corrupt ; aa it is, the reading ' väkyam, does not
give tny sense.

476

PIUgASTÄPADA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI SECTION (10.)

.

" Thus then, in as much as a verbal need can be supplied
only by words, as aHown above, the meaning or fact of eating
at night, which is not in any way signified by the sentence
pronounced» could not; supply the need of removing the inconsistency of fatness accompanied by absence of food during
the day> which is distinctly signified by the words uttered ;
and hence that fatness could not indicate the fact of eating
at night**
" And for this reason the presumptive Cognition (arthäpatti)
must be regarded as always pertaining to words."
" That is to say, in the case in question, the prqanmptive
Cognition, due to the sentence the fat person eats nut in the
day, must pertain to, and bring about the cognition of, the
sentence—he eats at night."
"And it would be this latter sentence which, being thus
comprehended (by presumptive cognition), would indicate its
vveaning (the fact of his eating at night.)9
To the above we make the following reply: Words are used
for the purpose of expressing the meanings of sentences ; and
each word singly is not capable of expressing the meaning of
the sentence, which consists of the relationships between the
words composing the sentence ; and thus having their final end
still unaccomplished, and while fulfilling a single purpose, the
word stands in ae$d of the other words« And in a case where the
words have fulljrdepressed the meaning of the sentence, they do
not stand in need of any other words ; as their function has been
*The reading of the whole page of the text is very corrupt. On
line 13, for tf we must have em. On line 15 for «f there should
be &. In 1. 17 for at, &. In 1. 18 < &**!?{ afafcfsH.' we must
haue !$qp$fanfi6tt: la L 18 for 3nrci we should have £9TOtd In
1. 19 for jKhrf......ihfm: , there should be R§«fT
ifr«CT.
Without these changes the whole page before innHlä in 1. 21
would be unintelligible.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

477

fully served. Nor can it be argued that " the meaning expressed by these words is not consistent" Because the function of
the word does not lie in the removal of inconsistencea as to facts
(objects),—its function resting in mere expression of the fact.
And this expressing (of the fact of fafe Devadatta not eating
in the day) is fully accomplished by the sentence under consideration, even when the sentence expressive of eating at night
is not near it; as we find that from the sentence (' fat Devadatta eats not in the day ') we fully cognise the fact of his not
eating in the day ; and this cognition is free from all doubts
aod discrepancjiesj_sp.eeiäliy as if it were not so, then there
would be no active force for the ' apparent incoüsistency ' either;
as it is only when we have a definite and correct cognition of the
man being fat, and yet as fully known to be one who does not
eat in the day, that an * inconsistency ' with regard to it can be
considered undesirable, and a removal thereof sought after. On
the other hand, if the cognition derived from the sentence were
either doubtful or known as mistaken, then where would be
the necessity of presuming a fact for the justification of such a
cognition ? Nor is it necessary that when two facts are mutually contradictory, the cognition of these should become a noncognition. Consequently, the word having its inconsistency
removed by the cognition of a new fact, it would not stand in
need of any other words ; as there is nothing else left to be done
by it; and in reality it is the fact signified by the sentence (* fat
Devadatta etc.,1) which, being inconsistent in the absence of
another fact, seeks this latter for its own justification. And
thus there can be no objection to the declaration that in the
case of Qi'utärthäpatti, there is an ' inference upon inference/
[Page 2250 Text (109): Probability also, following from
invariable concomitancey is a form of Inference
(IX-ii-5).
Commentary.
Some people hold that the cognition of a thousand gives
rise to the cognition of the hundred ;-and this is due to a dis-

478

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄS&YA-CHAP. VT. SECTION (l'Ö.)

tiact means of knowledge, in the form of ' Probability/
upon the probable existence of the ' hundred ' in the * thousand
In opposition to this view the author has declared that this is L
case ofrlnference ; as ' thousand ' is invariably concomitant with:
* hundred,' a» this latter always precedes the former ; and hence
the cognition of ' hundred ' from that of ' thousand ' cannot
but hs egarded as purely inferential.
IP. 225.] Text (110): Negation also is mere Inference^
just as the appearance of the effect becomes * itt|
dicative' of the existence of the cause, BO also does
the non-appearance of the effect become ' indica*.
tive' of the non-existence of the cause. (IX-ii-5)J
Commentary«
1
Some people hold that for the cognition of the absence of al
thing there is a distinct means in the shape of Negation, which
consists in the non-appearance of sense-perception and the four
means of knowing the presence of things. With a view to act
aside this view the author says—Negation also i$ mere lnf&r*\
ence. In proof of this assertion he adds: Just as etc. He also
who regards Negation as a distnict means of knowledge, does not
maintain that the cognition of the absence or non-existence of
a thing follows from mere non-appearance of its cognition ; aft,
if it were so then, a thing that is at a great distance from the
observer (and Is not cognised) would come to be cognised as *
non-existent (there being an absence of its cognition). What he jj
would hold is that, when all causes and conditions of cognising J
it are present, if there is non-appearance of the due cognition
of an object which is cognisable, then its non-cognition would
lead to the cognition of its non-existence. There is however no ;
difference in nature between-the non-cognition of the cognisable |
and that of the non-cognisable object; as there are no varying
grades of negation; and hence a negation cannot, by itself, like the
sense organs, bring about the cognition of anything; what cons*
titutes a difference between the two however is that the noncognition of the cognisabU ofyect is never found to fail in its
concomitance with the absence or non-exiatenxe of that object;

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES A»I> DISSIMILARITIES.

479

whereas the non-cognition the non-cognisable object is found to
fail in auch concomitance; as even when the non-cognisable object,
exists, there is non-cognition of it; and it is on account of this
difference that it is the non-cognition of the cognisable object,
and oot that of the non-cognisable object, that brings about
the cognition (of the non-existence of the object). And thus
negation becomes merely an ' inferential indicative/ as it would
stand in need of the due recognition of invaribie concomitance ; i£ it did not require this invariable concomitance, then
there would be nothing to prevent the undesirable contingency
that all negationJsjeguftUyliable to bring about the cognition
(of the absence of things; which the opponeut cannot admit).
[F. 226 ] Then agaiu, we find that when an empty spot of
earth has been seen by the eye, there comes about the coguitioo
of absence also, in the form that' this spot of earth has no jar
on it;' and in this case why should not the cognition of this
absence of the jar be regarded as sensuous, just like the cog*
nition of the spot of earth?
Object " The sense-organ is connected only with the positive factor in the conception (t. e. with the spot), which alone
is capable of being thus conoected."
Reply: This cannot be accepted until it is proved; all
capability is inferred from certaiu effects; and just as in the
case of the existente of objecca we find the effect (cognition)
regulated by the presence or absence of the operation of the
sense-organs, so do we also perceive in the case of that same
effect with regard to the non-existence of objects; and hence
non-existence also is as capable of being perceived by means of
the sense-organ** as existence. And the connection also of nonexistence with certain sense-organs might be assumed on the
streogth of the nature of the effects produced (in She shape of
cognition).
Objection: " No non-existence is ever cognised without a
" substratum; as its action or want of action is always found to
" be in reference to definite points of place and time, etc., and

480

PIU9ASTAP1DABHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

" the operation of the sense-organs pertains to the substratum
*' of the non-existence, and not to the non-existence itself; as ij
"shown by the fact of the cognition of non-existence appearin|
"even after the operation of the sense-organ has ceased;
" as for instance it so happens that a man having seen a house
"goes to another place ; and there on being asked by some one
11
as to the presence of Devadatta in the house, he has aroused
" in his mind, at that moment, the desire to learn the where«
" abouta of Devadatta ; and then having cognised the fact of hit
" non-existence iu the house, he replies—'he is not in the house" (and here we find that the non-existence has been cognised
" while the man is away from the temple, and he has none of his!
M
sense-organs in contact with the non-existence). Nor can i |
." be rightly urged that, this non-existence of Devatta in the
" house had been cognised, indeterminately, at the time that th
'*house was seen; and it is remembered at the subsequen
" time ;' because the indeterminate cognition of such objects
" the jar and the like is all very well, on account of their being i
" contact with the seuse-orgaus ; specially as the forms of these?
" things are independent of all other things ; as for non-existence^
" on the other hand, in as much as it is of a negative character!
" its very form depends upon that of which it is the negation |
" and thus there being no other form for non-existence than thel
" negation of that thing, any comprehension of it is impossible!
" without the comprehension of that thing which is its counter«!
"entity. The only difference between existence and non-exis^
" tence is that, wbils the former is cognised as a positive entity by^
" itself, the latter is cognised only as the egation of something
"else; as has been declared by the author af the Nyäyävarbika.
"The difference between existence and non-existence
" is due to the fact of the former being by itself the cause of its
"own cognition and non-coguition, and the latter depending
" upon something else for both ; that is to say that which exists
" is by itself the substratum of the means of cognition, while
" that which does not exist is so only in the form of the nega-

QUALITIESs SIMILARITIES AKD DISSIMILARITIES.

481

" tion of something else/ If non*eoristence also were cognised
" independently by itself, then it would in no way be different
'' from existence ; hence there can be no indeterminate cognition.
14
of non-existence. Then it has been argued that,—* ia the case
« cited above, was the cognition one of the house along with
" Devadatta, or that of the house apart from Devadatta t
" If the former, then the subsequent recalling could not be of
" the house alone ; and if the latter, then the non-existence (of
41
Devadatta) also will have beea already perceived ; and as
" such would only be remembered at the subsequent occasion/
"But there is not much in this argument ; because even though
"there be no ^ognftionof the existence or non-existence of
<' Devadatta (in the house), the house by itself could very
" well be cognised ; hence there could be no cognition of the
'• non-existence on the previous occasion ; and in the -absopoe
" of the previous cognition, the subsequent one could not be a
" ca*e öf remembrance. Nor is there any other means of know-J
/'* ledge available at the time. Consequently even though the
" ccunterrentjty be not in close proximity, when this would kß
* recalled by memory, there would be a cognition of ftoij11
existence ; and the means of this cognition ooiild only be ia
" the form of the absence of sense-perception and the other fowr
u
means of knowledge. The cognisability of non-existence by
" negation having thus been proved in one case, the .same
" reasoning might be applied to all other cases (of the cognition
"of non-existence); and thus it must be admitted that Negation
K
is a distinct means of knowledge/'
[Page 227] To the above we make the following reply: When
tfre man has gone away from the house to some other place and
is questioned as to the existence therein of Devadatta, does he
cognise the non-existence of Devadatta at the time of the question, by meaus of his non-perception at the same time ? Or does
he cognise his non-existence at the previous time—in the form
' he did not exist in the house at the time that I saw the house,
35

482 .

PRA5ÄJ3TAPÄDABHÄ3HYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

—by means of his non-perception there at that time? As
for the c non-perception at the present time' (of the question«
ing), this would not be the ' non-perception of the perceptible'
(wfeich is regarded as the means of cognising non-existence);
because of the house being hidden from view by the intervening space. And as for the non-existence of Devadatta in the
house at the time of the question, it would be doubtful ; as he
might have come into it in the mean time; and as for the previous ' non-percept ion,1—which alone could iudicate his nonexistence on the previous occasion, it could not continue
up to the time of the question; as the conditions will have
changed in the meantime. And when that' non-perception *
is not present at the time of the questioning, it could not
bring about any cognition (of present non-existence) ; nor
could it operate through being recalied to memory; a.s it has:
never before been cognised. That is to say,' non-perception ' is
not cognisable by any other means of knowledge, being, as it is,
of the nature of ' non-existence ' or' negation'; and if it were
4o depend upon another * non-perception' (for its cognition),
then there would be an endless series of ' non-perceptions ;' and
it is for this reason that it is maintained that like the senseorgans, ' aonperceptioa' also brings about the cognition of its
objective without being itself cognised. And such being the
case, as it would never be cognised, how could there be any
remembrance of it (as all remembrance is based upon a previous
cognition) ?
Objection : " The non-perception of Devadatta in the house
is aet aside only by his perception; but the man who has
gone away from the house does not have a perception of
him (in the house); and hence the previous non-perception
would remain. It is true that the conditions of the observer
will have changed (since he visited the house); but no change
of conditions can alter the nature of things/1
Reply: This may be so in the case in question; but in a
case where the non-existence of a thing has not been appre-

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES 4W DISSIMILARITIES.

483

bended, on account of there being no remembrance of its counterentity,—and later on that thing, is met with in the place«—
then there arises the idea that ' this thing did. not exist here
before/ with regard to its previous non-existence; what .explanation, will you have of this ? As in this case the previous nonperception ' will have been set aside by the later ' perception.'
Nor will the mere fact of its previous existence enable the ' nonperception/ even though non-existent at the subsequent time,
to bring about any cognitions; as if this could be possible,
then sensuous cognition also would be possible for one whose
sense-organs have been destroyed.
O^eö^an^Jilhe^presumption to-day does certainly set
aside the non-perception of the same day : as for the previous
non-perception, that remains; and this would be capable of
pointing to the previous non-existence, which would be duly
cognised by its means."
Reply: What a wonderful learning and philosophic
insight you display ! ' Non-perception ' is the previous negation of perception ; and this is one only, extending up to the
time of the appearance of the thing (when the non-perception
ceases); and it does not become different with the difference in
time, being the same to-day that it was yesterday; and then,
who would be the clever person who could assert that the
previous non-perception has been set aside, and that of to-day
still remains,—an assertion that indicates an extreme nicety
of discriminative faculty!
For these reasons then, we cannot understand how nonexistence can be rendered cognisable by negation; and we conclude that on the previous occasion (in the house) the observers
apprehended the mere form of non-existence, and then on the
subsequent occasion, having gone to the other place, he has the
cognition ofthat same non-existence, following upon the remembrance of its counter-entity (Devadatta); and this would be a case
of purely inferential cognition,—the process of inference involved

. nr. SBCTHMT (to.)

being this: when a thing is such as is capable of being fernem- i
bered at the remembrance of another thing, if the former is sot |
reineinbered even though the desire to remember it ia present!
(and the remembrance of the latter thing is also present), *
then it must follow that it did not exist at the time of the percept
tion of the other thing; as for instance, when the tnere plaoe ]
ia remembered, there is remembrance of the jar whose BOB-3
existence had been previously cognised; and in the case ifej
question even though the temple is remembered» we do not} re? "
member Devadatta, even though he is quite capable of being re-|
membered, and the desire to re ruem her him is also present; and
from this it follows that be Uid oot exist at the time that the
temple was perceived ; and this is a case of inference baaed up-j
on noanrememberance.
J
t?Äge 2$fi-] Obgectioni-*0£ two things perceived together, it so!
happens that, on account of the impressions of oae being stronger
than those of thetxther, while one is remembered, the other isj
not; for instance, when a Qloka is tearnt, it go happens that
when recalling the floka to the mind, while we distinctly
remember one line of it, the other line is not remembered a'ftj
ail; and in this case, one tine being remembered, how could,
there-be any inference of non-existence from the fact of the aonj
remembrance of the other line ? Any such inference Under
the circumstances would not be conclusive."
i!
-Rmly: Even when two things may exiat together, it may
be that, owing to the nature of the causes (leading to perception), while one of them is perceived, there is no perception;
of the other. How then cotfld -the toere p&rceptiofo <sf the ground
prove the ruw-mutenc« of the jar (as ft may be 4b«t while 4&e
causes for the perception tjt the form errate fully operative, those
M the perception of ^tihe I^Uter may «ot be eqtiaily eÄoieat,
even ^ough it nifty he existing *ti tae m<taj&) 1
I
Objection: " Wben two thmgB «re *e1*tea le Vo» *«i Ufa
«me cognition (e g.Xheffrounämälhejirf), tbe«,ifin<Ätt3r'«»e
only one of these happens «to be perceived, the mn^&tte^lon tf

QUALITIES : SlMILAEITISS AND DISSiaÜLAfcXTl$S.

485

the other and not all non-preception—proves that this latter
does not exist; e. g. the cognibioa that apprehends the ground,
apprehends also the jar in contact with it; the accessories for
the perception of the jar are the same as those for the perception
of the ground; hence if the jar existed on the ground, then it
would certainly be perceived when the groand is peroeived; AB
the conditions for the perception of both are exactly the same;
as a matter of fact however, in the case in question, the jar is
. not perceived; and hence it follows that it does not exist there ;
as its non-perception could not be otherwise possible."
Reply : If it be so, for us then also, of two things related
to the same cogaitioQ, if one is remembered and the other is not,
then this non-remembrance would prove the non-existence of this
latter; in the case in question, the conditions of the perception of
the house are the same as those for the perception of Deva.datta who is its correlative; and similarly the conditions of the
remembrance of the house are the same as those of the remembrance of Devadatta; hence in as much as the house and Devadatta would both be related to the same cognition, if Devadatta
had existed in the house ab the time that the house was perceived, he would certainly have been remembered when the
house was remembered; because of the conditions of the remembrance of both being the same; as a matter of fact however we
find that he is not remembered; and hence we conclude that
be did not exist in the house at the time; as his said nonremembrance, could not be otherwise explained. Aad this
process of reasoning would be exactly similar to your own:
As for the Qloka, for the sake of proper pronunciation its
words are read one after the other; and as such they are not
connected with one and the same cognition ; and those words
whose impression may be stronger than that of others would
be remembered, while the rest would not; and there would he
nothing incongruous in this.
Thus the», even when *n object is perceived at the present
time, the cognition of its 'previous non-existence—in the form

486

PRACASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CBAP. VI. SECTIOlf (10.)

.j

that 'it did not exist before,*—is purely inferential, being;
based upon the non-remembraoce of its existence at the timäf
when the previous existence of its counter-entity is remembered.
Some people hold that the absence of remembrance also is
only a form of * Negation' as a means of knowledge. But this f
view would be opposed to such declarations of the Bhctehya as—
' Negation is only the absence of the other means of knowledge'
and also to the Värtika which declares that' Negation is that I
where the five means of knowledge are not operative/ So here
we drop thisjsubject.
Others again maintain that, "in as much as there is no
knowable thing of a negative character, it is not right to enter
into any discussion as to the means of knowing it."
[Page 229-] To these people should be put the question—What'
is the substratum of the notion ' this is not' ? If it has no subs-1
tratum, then a great lending hand is given to the Mahäyänikas
(Bauddhas) who hold all notions to be without substratum. If
then, the ground be regarded as the necessary substratum,(of the
notion 'this is not') then even wiien the ground would be studded
with thorns, we would have the notion that' the thorn is not;j
and this would lead to our fearless passing and repassing overj
the ground; as there would be nothing to restrain us from.:
doing so.
|
Objection: It is with regard to the bare ground that we have
the notion ' it is not'; and as the preseuce of the thorns would
set aside the bareness of the ground, there could be no such,
notion as ' the thorn is not'; nor could there be any activity in
accordance with this notion."
J
Reply: Does bareness constitute the very form of the
ground, or is it a distinct quality of it ? If the former, then
it could not be set aside even when the thorn would be cognised ;
and hence the absurdity of the said notion and activity would
remain as before. If it be regarded as a distinct quality, then

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

*87

that would be admitting a distinct objective (as we regard
negation to be).
Objection: " It is existence (i e. an existiogthing the ground
j% i.) itself that has the two states of being alone, and of being
with a second; and it is in the former state that it is known as
' itself' or ' bare'; and when there is a desire to apprehend the
jar &c, that are the counter-entities of the ' bare' ground,
then the cognition of this bare ground brings about th* notions
and activities pertaining to the non-existence of these, jar and
other things."
Reply: What denotation of the word 'alone,' apart from
the ground wherein"trhe-jar-&crttfenon-exi3tent, have you established which you seek to make the substratum of the negative
notion * it is not* ? As a rule, unless there is a peculiarity in the
object cognised, there can be no peculiarity iu the cognition ;
nor till then can there be any change in the activity of the
Tagent.
Objection: " What we mean by alone is the singleness
that is natural to all things/'
Reply: What is tbis 'singleness1? Is it the absence of the
counter-entity, or the number 'one'? As for the number 'one/
it will remain as long as its substratum exists, and as such
would continue to exist even on the occasion of the object being
accompanied by a second. If the natural' singleness' be regarded as the absence of the counter-entity,—then the existence
of a distinct object of cognition becomes admitted.
Objection: " Even for one who accepts negation as a distinct
cognisable thing,—it is the apprehension of the bare ground
that becomes the cause of the cognition of negation ; as until
the ground has been apprehended, there can be no cognition of
any negation or non-existence therein. But the cognition that
'the thorn does not exist' cannot be due to the apprehension of
the ground as devoid of thorns; as if the apprehension of the
ground qualified by non-existence were the cause of the cogni-

488

PRAQASTAPÄDAfcÖÄSHYA—CHAP!VI. SECTION (10.) 1

'non-existence/—then it would come to this: the apJ
'
4
prehension of the non-existence (of thorns) would bring aboufr
the apprehension of the ground as qualified by that non-existence ; and the apprehension of the ground as qualified by that]
non-existence would lead to the apprehension of the noil-exis^l
tence; and thus this latter cognition would become its own cause!
For these reasons, it must be admitted even by you that of tbej
ground there is a certain condition of 'being alone,* whicb is)
independent of all touch with the counter-entity, and which is
distinct from 'negatiou' or 'non-existence'; and that the appre-^
hension of that condition brings about the cognition of nonexistence; and it is this that for us brings about the notion]
4
this does not exist'."
|
Reply: This is not right; as it is the apprehension of the
form of the ground itself that is the cause of the cognition ofi
non-existence. Nor would there be any chance of the cognition:
of this non-existence even when the ground would be perceived
along With something else; as like the apprehension of the;
ground, the direct contact of non-existence with the sense-organs
also is a accessary condition of the cognition of non-existeace |
and when there would be any such thiog as thoru and the like
on the ground, then, in as much as there would not be nonexistence, there would be no contact of the sense-organs with that
non-existence; and hence even though the apprehension of the
ground would be there, there would be no cognition of non-i
existence. As for instance, even though such aids to vision as
the eye and the proper amount of light are present, yet a
thing that does not exist in the place is never cognised.
Thus the face of 'Non-existence' being a distinct object of
cognition has been established.
[Page'230 ] Tbis 'Non-existence' is of four kinds: (1) Prägabhüvat 'Previous non-existence/ (2) Pradkvaiisäbhäva, Destruction,
(3) Itaräaräbhdva, 'mutual negation/ and (4) Atyantäbhdva
'Absolute non-existence/

QUALITIES : SIMILAKITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

489

(I) As an instance of' Previous non-existence/ we have the
non-existence of the effect in the cause, prior to its being produced. Prior to the appearance of the effect, there is its nonexistence, and this Previous non-existence, even though without
beginning, is yet transient; as it is destroyed by the appearance
of the effect; as if it were not destroyed then the effect would
not be produced.
Question. " What would be the destruction of Previous
non-existence t"
Answer: It would consist in the appearance of the effect«
Ob%: " In that case, when the object wili have ceased to
exist, there would-be a likelihood^of perceiving its * Previous
non-existence.' "
Reply: jNot so ; because like the object, its constituent
particles also, when operating towards their effects, constitute
the * destruction' of the Previous non-existence.
{2) 'Destruction, Prodhvansäbhäva, consists in the falling
off of the object from its real nature. And even though this has a
beginning, yet it is eternal; as the object (that has under-gone
destruction) is never again perceived.
Question: " The * beginning'of a thing consisting in its
coming into existence from previous non-existence,—what
would be the 'previous non-existence* of Destruction ?"
Answer: The 'previous non-existence' of Destruction
would consist in the normal condition of the existence of the
object of which it is the destruction. And just as the appear»
ance of an object is the disappearance of its 'previous non-existence/ 30 the appearance of Destruction would constitute the
disappearance or cessation of its 'previous non-existence/ It
would not be Tight to urge the objection that, " that which is a
non-entity, how could there be a 'non-existence' of that ?"—as no
objection can rightly be taken to what is in the nature of things.

490

PÄAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VT. SECTION (10.)

^3) The negation of the cow in the horse, and vice versa
constitutes 'mutual negation/ And this is one and the same
everywhere, and is eternal; as even when one object is des»
troyed, it is recognised just the same in another object,—just
like "generality.'* That is to say, just as 'generality' becomes
connected with whatever objecfc may be brought into existence
by unseen forces, and its externality belongs to it by its very
nature,—just so does 'mutual negation,' aiso; but there is
this difference: the generality is cognised on the mere apprehension of the object, whereas the apprehension ofjthe mutual
negation of an object stands in need of the cognition of the
counter-entity (the correlative); as it is comprehensible only in
regard to the form of another thing.
(4) 'Absolute non-existence' consists in the negation of what
has no existence at all.
Objection: "'Absolute non-existence* is nothing other
than mutual negation."
Reply: It is a wonder how you go astray even on a
high road! While 'mutual negation' consists in the negation of
identity between two such things as the cow and the horse, each
of whom has a well-known form of its own,—in 'absolute nonexistence' we have a negation, not limited by space or time, of
something that has no existence at all, and which is only
imposed upon the mind; e. g. there is no other object of cognition
apart from the six 'categories;' and if 'absolute non-existence'
were not admitted, then it would be absolutely impossible to
arrive at any such restriction as that 'there are only six categories/
Text (III): Similarly Tradition also, when true, is only
Trustworthy Assertion, (IX—ii—5).
Commentary.
The conjunct nipata ic the form of 'itiha is used in the
sense of continued tradition; and the affix *shyan* (in the

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

491

word 'aitihya') has the reflexive sense. As for false Tradition,
it cannot be a means of right knowledge; and true Tradition
would only be a form of 'Ttust worthy Assertion'; and 'Trustworthy Assertion' has been shown to be a form of ' Inference';
hence Tradition, \prhen true, does not differ from Inference.'

[ Page 23L] Text f 1Hj : Inference for the benefit of others'
consists in the expounding of something known to
the person himself, by means of a'five-membered'
sentence. That is to say, when by means of the
five-membered sentence a man expounds what he
himself knows to be absolutely truey to other persons, who have either a doubtful or a mistaken
idea about the thing, or have no knowledge of it
at all,—then we have what is called 'Inference /or
the benefit of others: (Xl-ii-L)
Commentary*
The author now proceeds to describe tho other kind of Inference, that for the benefit of other persons; When a fact is to
be proved by means of a sentence made up of certain words,—
those words that are necessary to convey the idea of the
fact are known as 'avayava, * Members ' in reference to the sentence as a whole. That is said to be 'known to the person a9
true1 which he knows for certain to be concomitant with the
subject in question; i. e. the ' inferential indicative ' which he
knows to be invariably concomitant with the subject; and the
expounding or putting forward of such an 'indicative' by means
of thefive-memberedsentence—that is to say, the pronouncing
of the five-fold sentence capable of bringing about the due
cognition of the 'indicative'—constitutes what is known as
'Inference for the benefit of others.'
The five-fold sentence expounds-as many forms or characters of the Inferential indicative' as tend to point out its invari-

492

PRAgASTAPÄDA #&/iSaYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

4
able concomitance with the subject, And it is the Inferential
indicative as expounded by means of the Sentence' that proves'
the subject; and the sentence itself does not express the subject;
as if it did» the cognition would be Verbal, and not inferential.
It is for this reason that' Inference for the benefit of others' is
said to consist in the pronouncing of the sentence expressive of
the inferential indicative as concomitant with the subject.
Other people hold the following view: " The denotation
of a word extends as far as the word may be meant to convey;
and in the case in question the 'sentence' is meant to convey the
idea of the conclusion, as it is for that purpose that the sentence
is pronounced. Then as for the pointing out of the 'inferential
indicative, this must be regarded as an intermediate (accessory)
operation, made necessary by the fact that the opponent would
not be convinced of the conclusion» by a mere verbal declaration."
These people put forward the following definition of Inference for the benefit of others':—" 'That which is known to
himself' is the sädhya, the Subject; and this ia proved by
means of the 'five-membered sentence/ through the intermediate
process of pointing out the Inferential indicative'; and the
putting forward of that Sentence1 constitutes ' Inference for the
benefit of others.' "
The author explains his own assertion—That is to say <fec.
Some people hold that the sentence in question ha.« only
two members ; others maintain that it has three; and with a
view to set aside these views, the author lays stress on the
number five—it is by means of the five-membered sentence.
The man who entertains doubts with regard to the subject
to be proved is called 'sangayitä; he who entertains ideas
contrary to the true one isiviparyast%>; and one who has neither
doubtful nor mistaken ideas, and has absolutely no knowledge
of the subject, is called 'avyutpanna 'ignorant*; all these
kinds of men are persons for whom the sentence ia question.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DIS8IMILARITXXS.

40$

is meant; as all of them are devoid of correct ideas on the
subject.
We perceive, in ourselves, the fact that, when a person
uses a number of words together, he has always the intention of
expressing a certain relation among the denotations of the word«
he uses; and when we have once come to know the necessary
character of this fact, whenever, subsequently, we find a number
of words used, we at once understaod that the person wtio has
uttered the words has the intention of expressing a certain relationship among the denotations of those words; and having oome
to understand this, through this we come to infer, from the words,
the meaning of the sentence ; and the meaning of the sentence is
not cognised directly by means of the denotations of the words
composing it. Because for the Mimausaka, there is no auch distinct means of knowledge as the " denotations of words;" nor
does there appear any power or capability of expressing the
meaning of the sentence, in the 'denotations of words/ each of
which is singly expressed hy each of the words composing that
sentence; beoause the operation of the means of knowledge
rests wholly in the bringing about of the cognition of the knowable object; and it does not add any potency to that object.
For these reasons, the ' denotations of words/ in expressing tbe
meaning of the sentences could express it, either as an ' inferential indicative/ or by apparent inconsistency ; and in any
case the cognition of the meaning of the sentence could no$ be
verbal.
[Page 23$.] Objection : " Does each word of a sentence,while
expressing a distinct meaning, become the 'inferential indicative'
of the meaning of the sentence ? Or, the words express their
meanings as related to one another (and this connected signification forms the meaning of the sentence) ?"
la answer to this sqme people hold the following view :
"The signification of the meanings by words is in accordance
with the knowledge that people possess of the words and their

494

PBAgASTAPÄDA BHÄ8HYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

meanings; and this knowledge is always either in regard to things |
related to certain actions, as found in the case of such assertions 1
of experienced person as * bring the cow,' ' tether the cow' and 4
the like,—or in regard to an action as related to certain things; I
and it is never in regard to the mere form of the words; and for
this reason it must be admitted that words denote only such |
meanings aa are related among themselves."
la connection with this subject we make the following
observations : In the case of the sentence * bring the cow/ if the •
word 'cow1 alone were to signify its own denotation as related to
that of the word 'bring/ then the addition of the word 'bring*
would be absolutely useless; as its denotation will have been
signified by the word 'cow.1
Objection: " The fact is that when the word 'bring' has aig«
nified its meaning, then, it is «that the word'cow' signifies its
own aa related to that meaning; and hence the word 'bring/ is
by no means superfluous."
Reply: In that case you admit that the word 'bring' at
any rate signifies its own meaning alone independently of its
relationship to the meaning of any other word; and as this
word would signify its own meaning free from all relationships,
so would any other word do; and thus the theory of Anvitdbhidkäna, 'signification of the related' becomes abandoned (lit
'taken for dead').
If it be held that the word 'bring* also signifies its own
meaning^ only as related to that of the other word,—then, it
would come to this that, until the former word ('cow' has not
signified its meaning, the latter word ' bring') would not signify its own as related to that of the former; and the former
word also could not signify its meaning as related to that of
the latter word, until this latter will have signified its meaning ;
and this would be a case of most undesirable mutual interdependence.

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DIsSIMILABITIBS.

495

Obj.: " There is no such inter-dependence; in as much as
what the words do at first is ooly to remind us of their meanings; and it is only later on that they actually signify their
own meanings as related to the reminded ones of the other
words."
Reply: There is not much to recommend in this dew
either; as (according to you) all words would have their concomitance recognised only with such ' meanings1 as are related
(to some other 'meanings1) ; and as such no word could remind
us of any meaning unrelated (to other meanings); as all remembrance is in accordance with previous cognitions.
Obj.: "From the usage of old experienced people we
learn that the word 'cow' is always concomitant with a certain
animal with a hump and other peculiarities, and not with any
actions or instruments of action; because we find that even
though these latter go on changing, the former remains constant,
and is one with reference to which aioue the word 'cow' is used.
And hence whenever the word 'cow' is heard, it reminds us only
of the animal with the hump &c; its concomitance with which
has been found to be unfailing,—and not of any actions or
instruments of action"
Reply: If such be the case, then, a word wonld have its
denotation restricted to that particular thing with which its
concomitance may be found to be unfailing; not to any other
thing; and this would be all right in accordance with the
Abhi-hitänvaya theory (the theory that each word in a sentence signifies its meaning independently of the meanings of the
other words). And as for ' remembrance/ it is not easily perceptible that its appearance is only in accordance with an unfailing
concomitance; as it is found to be produced by mere impressions
left on the mind ; and as such appears at the mere sight of a
correlative or associate (of the thing remembered). For instance,
when we see smoke, we remember not only fire, but also 9uch
places as the culinary hearth and the like. Thus then, if the word
'cow' were to remind us of the cow only through the recognition

496

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SflCTIOF (10.)

of its concomitance therewith,—then it might, at times, remind us
also of other objects that would be correlatives of the cow. fiutj
as it always reminds us of the coiv, it comes to have a denotativM
-potency with regard to that animal; as thus alone could thej
necessary character of the r minding be possible (and hence;;
the word would denote the object, and not oulyremind us of ib,)|
Then again, you hold that as in a sentence the words signify^
meanings only as related to one another, so in a word also thej
base and the temnination would signify meanings related
those of each other; and then, if these two will haye signified]
mutually related meanings» what other meaning'(object signified)!
besides these would there be, which would subsquently be re-j
membered by means of the whole word ? So we t'hall leavef
alone the assertion (of'Anvitäbhidhäna'), which falls into the|
category of the "Views of the Nagnätaka; and return, to the |
main subject under consideration.
Says the opponent: " We grant that the signification of
meanings by word* is in the manner you suggest; but it does
not stand to reason that the cognition of the meaoiog of a|
sentence is a case of' Inference for the benefit of others/ Bft-I
cause an Inference consists either in the * inferential indicative \
or in the cognition produced thereby ; and neither the indicative nor the cognition is ? fpr the benefit of others.1 If Infer-"
ence be aaid to be * for the benefit of others' on account of the
words expressing the inference being * fpr the benefit of others',
then Sensuous cognition also would come to be called ' fgr the
benefit pf others'; as the words expressive of that also are * for
the benefit of others'; as has been well said in the following
verses: * The character of inference belongs either to the cognition or to the paeans of that cognition; and neither of these two
is known, either in ordinary parlance or in the Veda, to be for
the benefit of others; and if the mere fact pf the expression being
for the benefit of others were to make the inference also for
$ther'8 benefit, then wherefore should pot sensuous cognition

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

4ß7

also, for the same reason, be regarded as being for the benefit
of others.' "
To the the above we make th* following reply : Wkat we
mean is, not that the expression being ' for the benefit of
others/ the Inference also is so, but that the ' fivemembered' sentence is for the benefit of others; and in as
much as that sentence, through the cognition that it affords of
the 'inferential «indicative/ becomes the cause or basis of Inference, it is inferential in its character.
Obj: Thus too, the inferential character will have to be
attributed to that sensuous perception which affords cognition
of the 'inferential indicative.' "
Reply: It will not have to be thns attributed ; as in the
case of sensuous perception we do not find any known word employed.

Note—(1) ' A nvüäbhidhäna-väda *—The sense of this theory which was propounded by Prabhäkara may be thus summarised : The first recognition of the
conventional denotation of a word is obtained only from usage. This usage can be
only in form of the younger man carrying out the instrnotion« of. the elder. This
tn«tracti«n m eomveyed by means of a «eateace, and never by- means of a single
word. The denotations of the words composing a sentence are necessarily related
to ene another. Hence it must be admitted that the recognition of the conventional meaning of a word appears only with regard to certain object», such as are
related to certain other objects. Thus then, this relationship being cognised by
direct denotation, there can be no need of admitting of a distinct verbal process in
the form of Tätparya or Import, as representing the meaning of ft sentence as
apart from the parts composing it.
(2) Äbhihitänvayaväda. This theory is held by Kumarila Bhatta and others.
The sense of tbia -view is that each word of a sentence denotes its own specfie
meaning and then on account of the threefold cause—of (1) Akänkthä, * Require*
aent,'(2) YopjÄ/ä, «Capability,' and (3) SaiwiirfAi, * Proximity./—there follows a
recognition of the relationship among these words. And thus thia recognition
of the relationship, which would constitute the ' meaning of the sentence,' cannot
be regarded as denoted direotly by the words themselves, which can be accepted
oqly to bring about the cognition of the meaning of the sentence, through processes other than that of Direct Denotation ; and to thn may be give» the name
of * Tätparya,' 'Import.*
36

498

PBACASTAPALA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (io.)

The author next proceeds to describe the five' members'
•f the sentence spoken of above—
-|
Tvst (113): These members are~-(l)Pratijn a,'Declaration
Proposition to be proved (2) Apadeca, Statement of the inferential indicative or 'middle terml
(3) Nidargana, 'Statement of the Major Premiss*
(4) Anusandhdna, ' Statement of the Minor Premtss,1 and (5) Pratydmnaya, ' Reiteration of the
Conclusion'.
Of these (1) the Conclvsion is the statement of what is
to be proved by means of the Inference, and which
is not incompatible with facts. That is to say, it
consists in the mere statement of the 'subject*^
endowed with the property sought to be proved,
with a view to point out the substratum of the
1
indicative! As an example of this we have the
proposition f Wind is a substance' (IX—ii—l),1
TXhe qualification ' not incompatible, <&c.' serves the purpose of excluding such propositions as may be
contrary to (1 j Sense-cognitioni (2) Inference,
Scriptures regarded as trustworthy by the speaker]
(4) that which would involve a self-contradiction, \
t. g. the proposition ' Fire id not hot,1 would be
contrary, to sense-cognition (1); (2) that ' dkägd
is dense would be contrary to Inference; (3):
that * the Brdhmana ought to drink wine' would
be ' contrary to scriptures '; and that ' the effect is
ever existing ' would, for the Vaiceshiha, be contrary to his own theory ; and (4) that < word is not
expressive * would involve a self-contradiction.
(Ill—i—15).
Commentary.
The word ' punah' is put in simply by way of ornamentation of speech. Having named the ' members ' he states the

QUALITIES: SIMILABITIBS AND DISSIMILAitfTIBS.

499

definition of the 'conclusion/ and then proceeds to explain
that definition. The object which is qualified by the property
sought to be proved, is the ' object to be inferred/ also called
the ' paksha,' * subject' or' Minor term ;' and the mere statement
of this, without the mention of any reasoning, is what is called
'Pratijnd,' ' Conclusion/ As has been declared by the learned—
'the statement constitutes the pratijnd, and its subject is the
'paksha/
06; : " If mere statement of the proposition, without any
reasonings, were the pratijnd, then as it would not in any way
contribute towards the provingof what is to be proved, it should
not deserve being mentioned in the statement of an inferential
argument; as say the Bauddhas : 'The ketu or the inferential
indicative, is that which indicates what is capable (of being
indicated) ; and the assertion of the minor term, being
incapable (of proving anything), is not capable of proving
what ie to be proved, even indirectly by the mere mention of
what is sought to be proved."
In view of this objection the author has added—'apadigavishayam <Scc' the 'apadega' is the hetu, the inferential indicative, the ' middle1 term ; and the conclusion is stated for the
purpose of making the' minor1 term the subject, the substratum
of the 'middle ' term ; as wherever that middle term may be
used for the purpose of proving what is to be proved, it is
always known to exist in the' subject' of the conclusion. Further,
as the ' inferential indicative ' is invariably found to inhere in,
a certain ' subject/ until this subjeet is mentioned, the ' indicative/ being without substratum, would not be operative; and
the indicative being inoperative,' what is sought to be proved
could not be proved ; hence in as much as the Pratijfiä serves
the purpose of pointing out the ' subject,' it helps by bringing
up that which is the substratum of the * indicative;' and thus
by supplying the substratum for the (indicative/ it mak$8
this latter operative, and thus becomes a necessary accessory
towards the proving of what is sought to be proved. To this

500

FHA<?ASTAPÄDA'BHÄSHYA~CBAP. VL SECTION (10.)

effect, the tfydyabhäahya says: ' If there were no
the indicative &c. being without substratum would not be|
operative.1
[Page 235-] Obj: "The substratum of the 'indicative' i«s
learnt from the Upanaya (and hence the statement of the
Pratifad caonot be a necessary factor.)1'
Reply :—This is not right; as until there is a statement'
of the PrtUijtiä, the Upanaya aläo is inoperative. What the!
Upanaya does is to point out the capability of the * indicative'j
to qualify the * subject;' and the person seeking knowledge doe«J
not, in the very first instance, require tbe * indicative' (or theJ
means of proof); but in as much as it is the most important
factor in what is to be proved, when this latter is sought after,!
the 'indicative' also is sought after for the purpose of proving J
if».; and the capability of this indicative is sought after at;
the end of all ; and hence it becomes necessary first of all to J
put forward the statement of what is to be proved ; and the
capability of the indicative does not come to be mentioned first; I
as at that time it is not wanted.
Olj.:—« The assertion of the' subject' being qualified by ike
property sought to be proved is self-cootradictory; as that
which is not yet known (and is sought to be learnt by mean«
of the Inference) cannot serve as a qualification."
Reply :—True ; that which is not known cannot be a
qualification ; but the * property to be proved f is already known
as existing in (qualifying) the Sapaksha (the arrow in the
case in question); and it is put forward m the Pratijfiä with
a view to point out the fact of its qualifying the * subject/ to the
person who denies such qualification. It is for this reason
that this ' subject' has the real character of the ' pahsha%'
the * tnmor' terra ; specially as even though by itself it is
already well known, yet as it is not so well known as qualified
by the property sought to he proved, it becomes capable of
being pointed out in that character (i. e. as qualified by tbat

QXUUTUKf: 8IHILAEITIES A#I> DISSIMILARITIES.

501

property); Thus too have we the fact of the ' indicative' feeing
a property of the ' subject/ For instance, (in the case of febe
argument' Word is evanescent because iU ia caused)' if it wej*
mere evanescence by itself (and not as qualifying, -word) thai
was sought to be proved, then the ' causednesa' qualifying the
word could not be a property of the ' subject'; while this
discrepancy ceases when the ' evanescence ' of the word is made
the object of to be proved. This has been thus stated by the
great teachers • ( This consists in both—the indicative and
the indicated ; without either of the two, it would be the indicated* and not the indicative.'
An instance of Ptätijnä is next cited t * Wind is 6 ?u£>stanee' ;—in this we have the statement of the conclusion in the
above form, wherein v)ind is spoken of as qualified by th*
character of 'substance/ which is sought to be proved for the
benefit of one who, while knowing the wind, does not know that
it is a substance.
He proceeds to explain the sense of the qualification
avirodhi* * not incompatible * &c. That which the debater
wishes to prove is the ' sädhya'; and it often happens that
by mistake he may. often wish to prove something that may h*
contrary to well-recognised facts of sense-perception; and
hence if the Prattjnt were defined only 'as the particular statement of what is to be proved/ then the character of 'Pratijfla7
would apply even to such statements as would be contrary to
well-recognised facts of sense-perception &c.; na a matter of fast
However DO such statement can ever be a ProtijflS ; because
such a statement would be impossible to prove; aad it is
with a view to preclude such statements that the aolbor b*j
added the qualification in question*. And thtur the definition
of PraüjüA comes to be that it is the, statement of #m*k qfye&t
(a be proved by inference as is not incompatible with w$Urecognieed facts of sense-preception *?.; and wbe* any» <ri$«at
to be thus proved is not found W be-so compatible the* its
statement is not Fratiyftok- .
:

502

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

The sense of all this is that the character of the real
sddkya does not depend upon the mere whim of the debater ;|
it belongs only to that which deserves proof; and that alone
is the ' paJcska * the ' subject * or the ' minor term \ and others
are only false fohskas.
Examples of incompatibility with facts of sense-perception
&c:—(1)' Fire is not hot *—'not hot' means a negation of heat;
and what is negatived is that which is known, and not what
is absolutely unknown; as a matter of fact however heat can
not be found anywhere else except in fire ; and the cognition
of heat in fire is not inferential ; as when there is no sensuous
cognition, Inference is not operative. And if what is known
by sensuous cognition is sought to be negatived by an inference
which can be based only upon a fact of sense-perception, then |
such an inference, being opposed to the fact of Sense-perception,
would beset aside by it; because of the objective having been
taken up by the sensuous cognition.
*
Question :—"What do you mean by the objective being
taken up"
Answer :—What is meant by the objective of Inference
having been taken up by the sensuous cognition is that this
latter indicates the object in a manner contrary to that indicated by the former.
Question :—"What happens to the Inference when its
objective has been thus taken up V
Answer:—It cannot appear at all That is to say, when
the sensuous cognition, which appears before any inference on
the subject, being of a character that does not make it negatived
or mistaken,—has pointed out the heat of thefire,—andthis
heat being thus taken up by this Sensuous Cognition, there
can be no correct cognition of the absence of heat in it. Any
1
reason ' that may be brought forward in support of such a
' conclusion * will be set aside by the very fact of its being
brought forward to support such an absurd conclusion,

QUALITIES •. SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES,

503

being incapable of bringing ab^at any rightful cognition thereof, on account of its incompatibility with sensuous cognition ;
As has been declared—* In a case of opposition between sensuous and inferential cognitions, there can be no room for the
latter; as before the very foundation of the latter came into
existence, the objective is taken up by the former.'
Obj.:—" As there is mutual contradiction between the said
Negativing (of Inference) on the ooe hand, and the invariable
concomitance (on which the Inference is based) 00 the other
<—that which is invariably concomitant cannot have any
negation (cannot be negatived)/1
Reply :—If by 'invariable concomitance* here you mean the
tripartite character of the argument, then it is not impossible
for it to be negatived ; as for instance, we find in the argument
—' fire is not hot, because it is caused.' If however you mean
' invariable concomitance' to consist in that tripartite
argument whose objective is not negatived ; and to hold that
invariable concomitance is not negatived,—then we quite agree
with you. But it is for the purpose of indicating the fact of
the objective not being negatived that the author has added
the qualification of compatibility with facts of sense-cognition &c.
Question:—"To what does incompatibility with sensecogntion &c. pertain 1 Does it pertain to the ' subject * or to the
1
reason '? It cannot pertain to the ' subject;' as this always
retains its character ; nor can it pertain to the * reason ;' as
the ' reason' is always capable of proving its own objective ;
and as for other objectives, all things would be equally incompetent. So the incoogruousness must pertain to the propounder of the argument; as it is he who brings forward the.
Reason for proviug something that does not form ifcs objective."
A newer :— If the ' incongruity ' be meant to consist in—
(1) the absence of the capability of being cognised of the fact
put forward in the conclusion to be proved, (2) in the pro-

$0$

PBMUSTAPÄIU BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IV. SECTION (10.)

pounding of the argument in support thereof, aud (3) thai
absence of capability (to prove),—fcben it would apply to thai
objective (i. a. the * subject1—to which the first form of thei
incongruity would apply) and to the instrument (i.e. the
'Reason,' to which the third form would apply) (as well aa|
to the propou»der who would be amenable to the second
form).
That * Älcäga is dense * would be contrary to Inference : 1
tbab very moans of knowledge whereby Äkäga is cognisedj
alwaya proves its eternality an<l nonpartite character \ hence to 1
assert that it has its constituents densely packed would be I
contrary to the Inference pertaining to the very form of the
* subject/
That the Brahnana should drittk wine would be contrary
to scriptures. The meaning of this proposition would be tbat
wine-drinking by the Brähmsna is not sinful. In support of this
conclusion 'milk* would be brought forward as the corrobora- f
tive * instance/ And the noa-sinful character of milk-drinking
U cognisable by means of the scriptures cousisting of Qrutis |
and Smrtis; and hence the same scriptures that would prove |
the nan-einful character of rniUc-drinking would also prove t be|
sinful character of wine-drinking ; aud thus the declaration of 1
the propriety of wine-drinking for the Brähmana would be "\
contrary to the means of knowledge pertaining to the instance ;
brought forward in its support.
If the Vaigeshika were to make the declaration that the
affect exists before it is produced by the cause, he would be contradicting his own philosophical tenets, l^he Vaigeshifca engages
in all discussions, resting upon the authority of the Vaigeshika
philosophy. And if he were to m:\ke the above declaration, it i
would be contrary to the Va'geshkii theory that prior to its
production by the cause the effect has no existence.
That the word is not expressive would involve a
telf-contradiction. If the word is not expressive of meaning,

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

5Q§

then it would he impossible to make use of any words to express the idea that wards ace not expressive. If such words
are used to this effect, then by this very use would the expressiveness of words become admitted; and hence the said
declaration would be self-coutradictovy»
Objection : " The ' scripture * being nothing more than the
statement of truths coguised by means of sensuous and inferential cognitions, a contradiction of it would only be a
contradiction of sensuous and inferential cognitions; and the
expressiveness of words being only an inference based upon
concomitance (of the word and the meaning expressed by it), a
negation of this expressiveness would only be a contradiction
of Inference ; and such being the case, why should fche author
have made separate mention of the contradiction of * scriptures '
and 'self-assertion'.?"
Reply: Scriptures are often found to be based upon mefe
semblance of truth; as we find in the case of the scriptures
of the Buddha and others. And if the Buddha were to declare
that all things are not momentary, what he would .be contra?
dieting would be his owu scriptures, and not aoy truth
(of perception or inference). As for one's own assertion
that too may some times be based upon an untruth; and hence
its contradiction need not necessarily involve a contradiction of,
truths (of perception or iufereuce).
Text (U4) ' The ' Apadeca' consists in the statement of
the ' inferential indicative.* That which is con*
comitant with the * subject * of inference, being
known to be so concomitant at all times, and with
all individuals of the class to which the * subject'
belongs,—and which, at all times, is never concomitant with the contradictory of that subject,—
ha* been spoken of as the ' inferential indicative' ,and it is the statement or putting forward of
this that constitutes * apadeca.' As Jor instance,

50 $

PRACASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

(in the same argument) the assertion—' beca
wind has an action and is endowed with certai
si
qualities.' Here we Und that ' action' a
' quality ' exist in the * subject' (the wind), a
the latter in all individuals of the class to w
it belongs, and the former not in all of th
and doth of these are never found in anything
ie 'not substance* Hence the statement as to
presence of these in wind constitutes the * a
(in the argument cited). (IX. ii. I),
Commentary.
Of the declaration that * wind is a substance, ' the apade\
consists in the assertion ' because it has action/ which put!
forward the ' inferential indicative'; and so also is the mentioi
of * presence of qualities,1 which is another ' inferential indi<
tive/ The author has cited these two instances, in order
show that the character of * hetu/ ' reason' or ' inferentii
indicative' belongs to such a thing as exists only in a part of the
sapaksha (*. e. in the case in question the ' sapaksha * consis
of all such substauces as are known to be active ; and 'action]
is found only in a certain part of this class, i. e. all substan
are not always active; but action can never exist a,
from a substance), as well as to that which pervades over the
whole of it (i. e. one quality or another is always present in all
substances).
The author shows that the aforesaid definition of the
4
inferential indicative' applies to the instances cited. 'Presence of qualities' belongs to the 'subject/ as also to all
membeis of the class 'substance' to which that subject belongs,
and which is the 'sapaksha'; and 'presence of action1 while
belonging to the subject, belongs only to some members of the'
class' substance'; i.e. to those substances alone that have material
bodies; and yet both of these—'action' and 'quality'—are
never found in anything that is not a substance, which 'oon-

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

507

substance' would be the ' vipaksha * (that wherein the inferential indicative is universally acknowledged to be non-existent).
And the patting forward of both of these by means of the assertion—' because it has action/ or ' because it has qualities'—
constitutes wbat is known as 'apadega,' or the Reason for the
Declaration, being as it is free from all discrepancies of reasoning.
Text (115): By this it is implied that such statements as
are either (1) <asiddhat (unknown, unproved),
or (2) ' viruddha' (contrary), or (3) '* sandigdha *
(doubtful), or (4) ' anadhyavasita' (unascerrained), have not the character of the true
' reason' (or ' indicative *).
(1) Of these the ' unknown * is of four kinds—4JOL)
* unknown to both,* (b) 'unknown to one of the
two* (c) - unknown in the form wanted, and (d)
'the unknown—subject-of-inference.* (a) The
* unknown to both * is that which is not known
to both the arguer and the person to whom the
argument is presented; e. g., the argument—' sound
isevaneseent^because it is made up of parts' (6)
As an example, of the ' unknown to one of the
two* we have—* sound is evanescent because it is
an effect* (c) We have the * unknown in the form
wanted* when what is meant to be indicated is
fire by the presence of smoke, but what is put
forward as the * reason* is steam, which is not
known in the form of smoke, id) We have
ike * unknown—subject-oj'-inference * in the argument—' Daikness in an earthy substance, because
it is black in colour!
(#} That whickt while not subsisting in the subject of
inference, does not subsist in any individual of
the same class, and subsists in its contradictories,—is what is known äs the * viruddha*

?RApUSTAP£DA BBÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)
1

contrary' Vea&on* as U proves something quite
contrary to the desired tonduaion; as an exan& §
pit of thin tea have the reasoning—' This Animal
is a horse, because it has horns/
(rf) That Mkick, while subsisting in the object of infer9nce> subsists in things öf the same kind as that
as well as in those of other kinds, is what is
known as 'sandigdha,' 'Doubtful/ as it creates
t* doubt in the mind; e. g., 'this animal is a cowt
because it has horns' Some people hold that when
in any subject there is a collision of two' contrary'
indicatives explained above, ifiefe arises a doubt;
and this is another kind of the * Doubtful' feason;
Hs for example in regard to the mind we find
that tke twx> reasons~(l) * because it has motion *
und (ß) * because it cannot be felt by touch *—are
put forward as indicative of its corporeal and
. non^oorporeal character respectively.
Objection j H This would be a case of the * asddhäranai
reason} because the two reasons cannot reside
together either in the ' subject * or in its contradictoryr,—just like ' non-vibibility ' and ' perceptibility/'
Reply: We shall explain later on that for this very reason
the reasoning in question is what is known as
the 'anadhyavasita*f unascertained.'
Objection: " / * the scriptures (the Sutras) we find it
mentioned in many places that two contrary
cognitions constitute the cause of doubt"
Reply : Not so ; as doubts always arise from the dual
perception of objects. That is to say, a Doubt is
always produced by the perception of the dual •
character of an object; and when both factors of the
duality would be oj equal authority, they would

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

509

contradict eaeh other ; and as such would not give
rise to any definite cognition ; but they could not
be the cause of any doubt; as a matter of fact,
in the instance cited, there is no equality of
authority in the two factors of the duality ; as
one of the two conclusions of the inference would
always be such as is denied by the scriptures; and
hence this (that has been put forward as an instance of another kind of the ' doubtful' reason)
would be only another kind of the 'contrary*
reason.
(4) That wfiich subsists in the ' subject' of the inference,
but not in any other object either, of the same
hind or any other, is one that is not recognised by either party ; and as suchy giving rise to
uncertainty, incomes to be known as the 'unascertained ' reason; as for instance—'the effect is an
entity, because U is produced. This is implied in
the sütra—'aprasiddh&napadecah*
Objection: " This distinctive feature has been spoken of
in the scriptures as the cause of doubt; and the
reason for this is that the distinctive feature of a
thing serves to distinguish it frow, like as well as
unlike objects, (and hence the 'unascertained,'
comes within the sütra that speaks of the * tandigdka* and not within that which speaks of the
*aprasiddha* (*unknown')•."
Reply : Not so; because of the meaning (of the sütra)
being different. That is to say, (the author of
the sütra having made the declaration that there
arises a doubt as to whether the audible object,
sound, is a substance, or a quality or an action)'—
the opponent has retorted that, in as muck as
tke di8tH%GtivB featu-re (of audibility) is found

510

PRA<?ASTAFJÜ>A BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

lj
t
in sound alone, there can be no doubt; and toi
this the author of the sütra has replied by poin&M
ing out that the distinctive feature of ' audiM
bility* does not belong specifically to either the 1
Substance alone, or to the Quality alone, or to
Action alone; in fact, it is common among i
all these; as in each of these three {substanceß
quality and action) we Und distinctive features!
that distinguish them from like as well as ttn-like objects; {and for this same reason, ' aud&\
bility' also would be a feature that would belong
in common to substance, quality and action; and
hence it would not give rise to a doubt); and]
thus what the sütrahas done is to paint out (that in
the said manner,' audibility ' might very weU be
regarde&as leading to an uncertainty or doubt)
and not that, a distinctive feature becomes a cause
or source of doubt For, if it were not, then, there
would be douhts with regard to all the six categories. For these reasons we conclude that Doubts
always arise from the cognition of features
common to more than one thing.
Commentary.

The above definition of apadeca serves to set aside such false
" reasons '* as the ' asiddha' etc. The qualification * concomitant with the subject of inference' shows that the unknown
reason is not a true ' reason;' the qualification ' known to exist
in an object of the same kind as the subject)' shows that the
* contrary)' and the * unascertained ' are not true * reasons';
and the qualification ' that which never exists in that which ia
the.contradictory of the subject' sets aside the ' Doubtful' from
the category of true ' reason.1
(1) Of the four false reasons, the.author proceeds to
describe the ' unknown.' The * unknown' or ' aviddha' is of

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

$U

four kinds—(I) ' Unknown to both ' etc. (1; The 'unknown to
both ' or *ubhayösiddhd' is that which i<* not known either to
the propounder of the argument or to oue for whose benefit the
argument is put forward; as an example of this we have the reasoning—' sound is evaoescent. because it is made up of parts '; as
the fact of sound being made up of parts is not known either
to the person putting forward the argument, or to his opponent.
(2) Aa an example of that which is ' unknown to one of
the two' or ' Anyatardsiddha' we have the reasoning—' Sound
is evanescent, because it is an effect* where though in reality
(according to us) Sound has the character of an effect, yet this
fact is not known or recognised by the Mlmdnsaka, who denies
the evanescent character of sound, and against whom the argument is brought forward; such a reason cannot establish
any conclusion, until it has itself been proved (by some other
reasoning),
(3) The * unknown in the form wanted ' or * Tadbhdvdsidhha * we have in the argument where the presence ofo steam
is put forward as the reason for proving the existence offiref
which was really meant to be proved by the mention of the
presence of smoke; as 'steam "is not known in the form or
character of' smoke/
(4) The 'unknown subject of Inference* or (anumeyasiddhaf
we have in the argument—' Darkness is an earthy substance,
because it is black in colour;' where as a matter of fact there
is no such substance as ' Darkness/ as what is perceived is
mere blackness impressed upon, some substance or other; coosequently the reasoning that ' Darkness is an earthy substance
because it is black in colour ' affords an instance of the ' unknown-subject/ the ' anumeyasiddha ' or ' dcraydsiddha ;' the
compound ' anumeyasiddha ' is to be explained as Bahuvrihi'
* that (reasoning) of which the subject (anumeya) is not known;,
and as such though the proper form would have been ' asiddhänumeya,' yet, in as much as the compound belongs to the

512

PRA£ASTAPÄDABHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

,
J
same class as * ähitägni> the precedence of the participial factor. |
becomes a matter option {vide Pänmt II. ii. 37). Just as the 1
Reason is * unknown to any one of the two' or * unknown to \
both,' so in the same manner the ' unknown subject ' also may
be of two kinds—i. e., unknown to one or both ofthe disputants.
Secondly, just as the ' Reason is unknowu ' by one or both dis« f
putants either nob knowing it, or haviug a doubtful knowledge
of it, or having a mistaken idea of it,—so in the same three i
ways would the 'subject' also be ' unknown/ Thirdly, in the •!
case of the * Reason ' we find that—(1) it is ' unknown to one
disputant who is not uncertain about it, simply because he has
no conception of it, while to the other disputant it is *ankaowa'
because of his having only a doubtful knowledge of it,—(?) or
that to the former ic is * unknown' simply because he has DO
kuowledge of it, while to the latter it may be 'unknown' oa
account of his having no right conception of it,—(3) or that to
the former it ia^unkuown1 as he has no certain knowledge of
it, while to the latter it is ' unknown ' because of his having no
knowledge of it,—(4) or that to the former it may be * unknown*
because of his having a mistaken knowledge of it, while to the
latter it is ' uuknown' because of bis knowledge of it being un- ;
certain ; and ail these diversities would be found in the case of
the ' unknown subject' also,
As for the * unknown ' qualification ' &c, these are included ia the * unknown to one or to both ' ; aad hence our author
does not mention them separately.
(2) Tne author proceeds to describe the 'contrary.' false
Reason : ' Contrary, &a, &c.' Sometimes it may so happen that
a man seeing a certain animal in the forest would infer thus :
' this animal is a horse because it has horns ;' and in this case,
we know that horns are, in reality, found to balong, not to any
horse, but to animals other than the horse; viz., the cow. the
buffalo and the like; and by reason of this concomitance
the preserve of horns would prove something totally different
from the ' horse'; hence proving something quite contrary

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

513

to the ' subject' of the syllogism, the ' reason ' is called the
contrary' reason.
[Page 241.] The example cited is one of such ' contrary reasonf
as resides in one part of the 'contrary of the subject;' as the
born is not present ia all that is * not-horse,'—for instance, it is
not found in the pillar (which also is as much a * non-horse ' as
the cow or the buffalo). An example of the * contrary reason '
pervading over all that is the contrary of the * subject,' we
have in the argument—c Sound is eternal because it ts produced.'
(Where the character of being produced belongs to all that is
non-eternal).
(3) That reason which, while subsisting in the * subject/
subsists also in things of the same as well as of other classes,
is called the ' Doubtful ' ; as it always gives rises to uncertainty.
As an example of this, we have the argument—* this is a cow,
because it'has horns.' In this case we find that the horn
exists in the cow as well as in the buffalo ; and hence the ' presence of the horn ' would leave it uncertain whether the animal
is a cow or a buffalo ; and as such this would be a * Doubtful'
reason. This is the instance of a reason which subsisting in
the subject as well as its contraries, subsists only in a few of
these contraries ; and this reason is called the ' anaikdntilca,'
' Inconclusive.' Another reason of the same class would be that
which pervades over the whole rangp. of the subject and its
contraries; an example of this we have in the argument—
* Sound is eternal because it is cognisable ' (where cogaisability
belongs all things eternal as well as non-eternal). An example
ofthat which subsists only in\parts of the subject aud its contrary, we have in the argument—' Akolga is eternal, because it
is incorporeal' (where * incorporeality ' is such as subsists in a
few eternal and also a few nou-eterual things). A reason that
subsists only in. a portion of the ' subject,' and pervades over the
whole of its contrary, we have in the argument—* Sound is a
substance, because it is not made of constituent parts (where it
—

PBACASTAPlDA BHÄ3HYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)
is only a few substances that are not made up of constituent
paxts, while all non-substances are so constituted).
In the text we read ' that which is common (sädhärana) to
the things of the same kind &c. &c.'; and the author explains
the meaning of the word * common ' by the words 'samöo*1
&c, " Juet as a certain property, being fou»d in the ' subject \
as well as its contrary, would give rise to an uncertainty with
regard to the object to which it belongs, and would thereby
fyqome a ' Doubtful Reason/—so, in the same manner, when*
we find, in the same subject, two mutually contradictory
'reasons* (of equal validity),, tending to two contradictory
conclusions, we have another kind of the ' Doubtful ' Reason,
consisting of the collision of two contradictory reasons." Such
is the view held by some people ; and the author proceeds to
refute it : * Some people, &c* With a view to this, be cites an]
example of this kind of reason : In regard to the mind we
And the two reasons—(I) * because it has motion * and (2)
* because it cannot be felt by touch' — put forward as indicative of its corporeal and incorporeal character respectively^
These reasonings may be thus amplified : (1) 'The mind is
corporeal, because it has actions, like the arrow/ (2) ' the mind1
i* incorporeal because it is uot felt by touch, like Akdca*.
Here we find a collision of the two reasons, mobility and intangibility, leading to two mutually contradictory conclusions ; andj
this gives rise to a doubt as to whether in reality the mind is1
corporeal or incorporeal. And certainly both reasons could noti
be equally valid ; as one and the same thing could not have]
two such contradictory characters (as corporeality and incor-)
poi'eality). And as the two reasons are mutually contradictory,!
both could not be invalid either, as there could be no third*|
character for the mind, apart from both corporeality and"
tncorporeality, But we can find no reason whereby we
oould feel certain of the validity of either one of the two
reasons. Hence on account of the two reasons—'mobility'
and * tangibility'—there arises a doubt as to the mind being

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSJMILAHITIKS.

SI 5

corporeal or incorporeal. The Viruddhdvyabic&ri reason
differs from the Prakaranasama reason only ou this point
that, while the former #reates a doubt in the mind, the latter
simply fails to remove the uncertainty for the settling of which
it is brought forward.
Objection : " This would be a case of the * Asxdharana *
"reason &c. That is to say, {each one of the two reasons—
" * mobility ' and ' tangibility '—does not create any doubt in our
" mind, as each leads to a definite conclusion. Then as for
" the collision of the two, it would be nothing more than what
" is known as the ' asädkärana ' reason» as the two together
" do not subsist in any ' subject' (sapakiha) or ' contra-subject'
" (vipahshd), apart from the mind. Just as in the case of the
K
two qualities of invalidity and perceptibility, we fi&d thafr
"though each of them is not an incompatible quality, yet
" conjointly they cannot exist anywhere apart from the mind.
" Though it> is the collision of two such properties as are not
" incompatible and yet mutually contradictory that constitutes
" the * Asddhdrana' reason, yet such a reason would only be
"a source of uncertainty. As for the * negative' (vyatirehi)
* reason it is certain that it is excluded from the' cobtra-subject'
"(vipaksha) alone ; and as such it leads to a definite conclusion.
"The ' Asadhdrana ' (uncommon) reason, on the other hand,
"is such that its exclusion is never absolutely certain ; as it
" is as likely to be excluded from the ' subject' as from the
"' contra-subject/ As, if * odourousness' being excluded from
" non-eternal things ' would prove * eternity/ it would, as reason"ably, prove * non-eternality' also, as excluded from the *eter" nal thing/ Äkäca. But as a matter of fact, both cannot be
"rightly proved, as any one thing cannot have the two con" tradictory characters of eternality and non-eternality. Nor
" could both be not proved, as the two being mutually ex" elusive, there can be no intermediate stage (between ' eter" nalifcy ' and ' non-eternality '). Consequently the fact of the
" Earth being (odorous' leaves it doubtful whether the Earth

516

PBA<?A8TAPJJ>A. BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI, SECTION (10,)

" is eternal or non-eternal; as has been declared by the reve
" Kutöärila Bhatta : ' Where we have a certain property whic
*' is asädhärana, in as much* the negatioa of both could not
w
subsist in any subject, its negation becomes a source of doubt,
" (Qlokavdttika—Anumdna, Qloka 88-89); and the autho
" of the Wydyavdrtiha also has thus declared : 'la as muc
* the character of being born of a disjunction which cons
" in having for its substantial cause a disjunction born of anothe
"disjunction—is not possible apart from Sound, the reason
* {being born of a disjunction) heing precluded from all thing
" becomes a source of doubt or uncertainty V
To the above, our author offers the following reply
It ia for this reason that we shall explain laier on that \
a reason is what we call the ' Avadhyavasita ' ' unascertain
That is to say, we shall point out later on that the collis:
of two contradictory properties constitutes the * Asddhdra
reason, and being ' Asädhärana* it becomes the ' anadhy
vaeita.*
The author having shown that the character of
Doubtful Reason' does not belong to that reason which j
Viruddhavydbhichari' (not incompatible with the ' contrary!
the objector brings forward the objection that such a vie
would be against what has been taught by the scriptures bi
the subject (£. e. the Sütras)—" Nanu &c. ' ubhayathd darcan
" am—' what is meant by this is that in the scriptures it has 1
" declared in many places that when a certain * subject *|
"found to be accompanied by two mutually contradic
" properties, there always arises a doubt in the mind of I
" observer ; and such is also the common experience of i
** people ; and when we see something that resembles wh
" we have seen, there arises a doubt. For instance, in the <
M
of the self we have found * inoorporeaiity' accompanied by * i|
" tangibility'; and we have observed the same in the casej
" the mind also ; then again, in the mind we also find ' activil
4

QUALITIES : SIMILABITIBS AND DISSDHLAAITIBS.

517

" or mobility/ which we have seen, in the atom, to be aceom"panied by 'corporeality'; consequently observing thai in the
"mind we have 'intangibility'—which we have found to be
u
accompanied by incorporeality,—as well as * mobility'—which
rt
we have seen, is accompanied by ' corporeality, there arises a
"doubt in our mind as to whether the "mind is corporeal or
w
incorporeal (material or immaterial). The süIra bearing on
"this point is as follows: * yathädrshfamayathädrshtamubfia" yatkädrsht'ttvät samgayah•'; and the meaning of this that,
" as in the case of mind we have seen that it has the property
«of 'mobility/ which we have found (in the atom) to be not
" incompatible with * corporeality'; (this would be 'yathddrshta)'',
" —so also we have seen, to the contrary (* ayathddrshta *) we
" have found (in the self) that it has also the property of
" in tangibility which, in its turn, is nofc incompatible
" with ' incorporeality'; and from this twofold observation
* {* ubhayathädrshtatvät) there arises the doubt as to whether
u
the mind is * corporeal or material' on account of its ' mobility/
" or it. is' incorporeal or immaterial' on account of its intangibi" lity. Thus then, if you reject the fact of the Viruddhävya*
" bhicdri. Reason being a source of Doubt, you distinctly «con" tradict what has been declared in the sütra"
To the above objection, the author replies as follows: Not so;
fo doubt always arises from the perception of a duality of objects.
That is to say, there is no such contradiction as you point out.
because a Doubt arises only when there is a dala perception df
objects. This the author proceeds to explain further : That
is to say &c. The meaning of this is that the source of Doubt
lies in the dual perception of objects. For instance, in regard
to a tall object like the wooden post, there arises a doubt as
to whether it is a post or a man standing ; and the reason (or
this lies in the previous'dual perception* of tallness—viz :
as found in the post and in the standing man-, and the doubt
is not due to the collision, in one and the same objeqt, of two
contradictory properties. And hence the sütra .cannot be

518

PRA0ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VL SECTION (10.) "
•M.
taken to mean, that doubt arises from the collision of two con«
tradictory properties not incompatible with the object in
question.
Similarly, the meaning of ' drshpinca drshtavad
»ay be thus explained :—' d?skta ' is the obje#t, the man or the
post, seen on a previous occasion, to be similar to another mail
and another post (• drshtavat') ; and when, by some cause or
other, we happen to see that man or post, at some other time
and in some other place, and ara not able to exercise a proper^
discrimination,—there arises the doubt as to the object before;
a* being a man or a post; the particle 'ca after
is added with a view to indicate that even though the object"
before us may not have been seen by us before, if it only happens:
to resemble the post and the man (which are the ' seen' andi
similar to ' the seen'), the doubt arises.
|
There is another sütra—* yathädrshtamayathädrshtamuS
bhayathädrshtam' <£c.; and this points out the doubt that!
arises from the remembrance of a particular object (having thej
appearance of the object before the eyes). For instance, wq
see a man in a certain condition—with shaven hair or with
matted locks f.i. ; and then after sometime we see the same
man, in a condition other than the one observed on the previous occasion ; and then not seeing the previously seen conditions, and yet recalling to our mind both the conditions, we
may have the doubt as to whether the man, on this latter,
occasion, has his head shaven or is wearing matted locks.
Then as for the Viruddhdvyabkicäri reason, it can never
be the source of doubt; as it is never put forward. That
is to say, when the ' reason' put forward first has been recognised to fulfil the aforesaid conditions (of the true reason), then
the subject in question is duly ascertained to be of the character indicated by that reason ; and hence there can be no
occasion for the other contrary reason to be put forward ; as
its way is blocked by the accomplished cognition (afforded by

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

519

the former Reason). And it the previous reason fails to bring
about a definite cognition, then it becomes open to this same
charge (of not leading to a definite conclusion); and there is
no necessity for the bringing forward of the counter-argument
(based upon the ' contrary reason').
Objection : " The previous reason becomes * viruddhävynu
bhicari' by reason of its not being incompatible ttf&Ä,—•
" of allowing of the appearance of—the counter-argument;
* and the objection or fallacy to which such a reason is open lies
" in this very possibility of the counter-argument; because
u
when the contrary conclusion is brought up by the contrary
•* reason, the previous reason fails to establish the conclusion
"it was put forward to prove."
Reply : If like the second argument, the first argument
were also a properly equipped inferential reasoning, fulfilling
all the conditions of a valid argument,—then, if it were found
to fail in its purpose of establishing the conclusion, what confidence could we have in any inferential reason (as the mere
fact of fulfilling all the conditions would no longer be sufficient
security) ?
Objection : " Tbe first reason fails to establish its * conclusion for the simple reason that the subject in question is
not possessed of the dual character (indicated by the two contrary reasons)."
Reply : Who has told you that an object cannot have a
dual character ? The essence or character of an object consists
in whatever is indicated by a means of right knowledge.
If the fact of any one object not- having a dual character, be
such as is established by a stronger and more authoritative
means of knowledge, and as such, cannot be set aside,—then,
in that case, the two reaeons (one indicating the single and
another the dual character of the object) would not be of
equal strength and validity ; and under the circumstances,
how could there be any doubt ?

520

PBA£ASTAPÄDABHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

Objection : " Though in reality both are not true, yet the
fact of neither of the two having any points perceived in its
favour would lead us to think of them as of equal validity or
reality or both,"
Reply : Ife may be so ; but even then, just as the equal1
validity of both would lead to one being set aside by the
other, so too would it make us reject the latter by the former
and thus there being a mutual rejection, neither of the two'
would be capable of proving the conclusion it may be sought
to prove; but this would not make them produce any doubt in
the mind of the observer. Specially as in such a case what
happens is that there is no definite cognition at all, and not
that two mutually contradictory cognitions are brought up fand
a doubt would arise only in the latter case). This is what ourj
author means by the sentence—iiuhen both factors of the
duality would be of equal authority <$sc!
Objection : "That which is an object must be either material
or immaterial; there can be no third alternative; hence in the
case of mind, when we perceive neither its materiality nor im*
materiality, we might presume the absence or presence of both £
and this presumption would certainly give rise to a doubt in
our minds as to whether it is material or immaterial."
Reply : It is quite true that the doubt arises ; but it arises,4
not from the collision in the mind of two mutually contra-~|
dictory properties, but from the very nature of the thing itself; |
—that thing which, having been perceived to be concomitant 1
with materiality and immateriality, is cognised as subsisting 1
in the mind, and hence brings to us the recollection of those |
two properties.
J
Our author has rejected the theory 'that the viruddhä-1
vyabkicdH reason is a source of doubt, after having admitted j
the fact of two contradictory reasons having equal validity. 1
As a matter of fact however, the validity of the two is not ot
equal strength. As the conclusion that 'the mind is im-

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

521

"material/ which is indicated by one of the two reasons, has
thä disadvantage of being negatived by the scriptural text of
the sütra, ' the mind is atomic, by reason of the absence
<kc. If (in order to - avoid this predicament) it be argued
that this sutra is not authoritative, then the mind would be
something omnipresent; but as there is no evidence for the
existence of such a miud, the argument that * the mind is
immaterial, because it is intangible' would be totally without
a basis (as there would be no mind in which the properties
could iuhere). If the existence of mind be sought to be proved
by the fact of ail kinds of sense-cognition not appearing at
one and the same time, then the reason in question becomes
such as is set aside by the means of cognising the Subject1
(mind); as the simultaneous appearance of all sense-cognitions can be impossible only if the mind be atomic ; as if the
mind were omnipresent, then, in as much as all the senseorgans would all at once be in contact with it, there woujd
be nothing to prevent the simultaneous appearance of all
kinds of sense-cognition.
Question: "If the subject of Inference be such as is
opposed to scriptural authority, what kind of fallacy would that
be ?"
The author says in answer to this : This ivould be another
kind of the * contrary * reason. That is to say, such a
reasoning being contrary to scriptures would be only one bind
of the ' wrong conclusions ' that are opposed to well-recognised
facts of Sense-perception, Inference &c,—ail such conclusions
having been precluded from ' true reasoning' by the mention
of' avivodhi' * u®&-contradictary ' or * not incongruous,' in the
definition of the Pratijnä or * Declaration of Conclusion;'
i. 6. it would not be a 'doubtful reason ;' beirjor onlv a kiud of
the 'coutradictory ' or * incongruous* reasoning.
The ' anadhyavasitaj or ' unascertained ' is the name
given to that false reason which has elsewhere been called the
' asadhärana* 'uncommon;' and the author now proceeds to

522

PRA<?ASTAPÄLA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

explain it: That which subsists &c. For instance, with a view!
to prove that *the effect had an existence even before tbe|
operation of its cause/ we find the reason ' because of its productioD,* brought forward by the Sänkliyas. And h«re we j
find that the reason, does not subsist in the äkäga which is an'f
entity and which therefore is sapakiha,; and yet it is not found
to subsist in the 'sky-flower' which is a recognised non-entity,.«
aod which therefore is a distinct Vipaksha; and thus the i
reason cannot prove either the conclusion or its contradictory. *
The reason in question,—' because it ia produced '—cannot ]
be called ' asiddka' or * unknown ;' because it is not so for the .)
Sänkhyas, who hold that c production' is only the ' manifestation* ;
of something not manifested before.
Question: "In which sentence of the sütra is this .
' Anadhyava^ita' or Unascertained Reason indicated?"
[Page 245] Answer: It is indicated by the sütra 'ayamaprasiddho-napadegah. '
Objection : " Like the Anaikäntika-ov * Inconclusive ' Reason, the Asädhärana * or ' Uncommon Reason ' only creates a
doubt in the mind ; and hence it would be more correct to say
that it is indicated in the sütra * sandigdhagcänapadBgah \—
and not in * ayamaprasiddho' na-padegah' This objection is
what is meant when our author says—nanu ca &c. The
Locative ending in ' bhütesha * has the sense of the Ablative ; as
the distinctive feature of tilings serves to distinguish them from
things of the same kind, and also from those of another kind ;
e. g. the distinctive feature of the E trth, * Oj-lorousness,' serves to
distinguish it from other members of the same class of'Substance,' as well as from Qualities and Actiou (which are notsub8tance). In Sound we find th^ distinctive feature of' audibility';
and there arises a question as to whether this feature serves to
distinguish Sound from Colour and other things of the same
kind as itself^ or it serves to distinguish it from things of different kinds? But it js clearly seen that if Sound is a Quality,

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES ASTD DISSIMILABITIES.

523

then the said feature distinguishes it from Colour &c., which be*
ing Qualities are of the same kind or class as itself; but; if it is a
Substance, or an Action, then it would distinguish it from Colour
&c.t which, being Qualities, would be 'things of a different kind
or class' ? And thus the ' audibility ' of Sound, if brought forward as a ' reason,' would leave it doubtful whether Sound was
a Substance, or a Quality or aa Action/'
The opponent having thus brought forward the charge of
contradicting the Sutra, our author offers the following reply :
Not so; because of the meaning of the sütra being different.
That is to say, the meaaiug of the sütra is not that*the asädhärana reason is the source of doubt,'—as the obj ector has explained it; it means something wholly different ; and our author proceeds to explain this true meaning : Qabde vicsshadircanat <&c.
Haviug shown that that which is comprehensible by tbe sense
of audition is Sound, the author of the Sütra has said that with
regard to this sound there arises a doubt as to whether it is a
Substance or a Quality or an Action; and the sense of this is
that, with, regard to that audible thing, there arises the doubt as
to whether it may be a Substance, or a Quality or an Action.
On this the opponent comes forward with the following
argument : " When you declare that there is doubt with regard
to Sound which is perceived by the sense of audition, you
clearly imply that * perceptibility by the sense of audition/ or
* audibility/ constitutes the source of doubt. But ' audibility' is
a distinctive feature of Sound ; and the recognition of such a
feature could never 'make any doubt possible ; as a doubt is
always due to the remembrance of two mutually contradictory
properties; and such remembrance would never be possible
when a distinctive feature of the object in question has been
duly recognised ; specially when the distinctive feature perceived
is such as has never been perceived along with any other
property."
The opponent having put forward this argument, the author
of the Sütra has given his reply to i t ; and the sense of the

524

PTUgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

reply is that * audibility ' is not a distinctive feature of any one
of the three larger categories, Substance, Quality or Action ; ia
fact it comes to be common to all of these. Because in each of
these three we find distinctive features that distinguish them |
from like as well as unlike objects ; ' Bheda'r=that which is 1
differentiated, different thing ; hence ' dravyädibhedäh'—Substance and other things, viz., Substance, Quality and Action
and in everyone of these such distinguishing features are found ;
as for instance, in the Earth we find the distinctive feature of the,
character of earth—which distinguishes It from its like objects
other Substances—along with the character of Substance ;
in Colour we find the character of colour,—which distinguishes it from other Q u/ilities—raiong with the character of
quality; in Throwing Upward, we find the character of throwing upuOard—which distinguishes it from other Actions—.
along with the character of action ; a-bd similarly ia Sound also
the distinctive feature of Audibility is found along with the
character of Quality. Consequently this distinguishing feature
also becomes common to Substances, Qualities and Actions ;
and as such it is only righfcto regard it as the source of doubt;
as for the individuality (or the specific feature of Sound)
that could never give rise to any doubt ; as it would not bring
to the mind any distinguishing characters. It is with a view
to all this that the author says—It would not give rise to a,
doubt. We deduce ail this meaning from the fact of the Sütra
having used the Locative ending in the words ' Tu,lyajitiyethu
arthäatarabhüteshu,' instead of the Ablative. The construction
of the sütra may be thus explained :—On the recognition of the
distinctive feature of audibility in Sound Ihere arises a doubt
as to whether it is a Substance or a Quality or an Action ; and
the reason for this U«s in the fact of everyone of these three
having drs'tinguishiug features that reside in their like objects
(Sapakshaa) and also in the unlike ones {Vipakihas).
The upshot of all this comes to be this : A distinctive
feature we have found in Substance, in Quality and in Action ;

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

525

and in Sound also we find a distinctive feature in the shape of
Audibility;
hence the mere presence of a distinctive
feature gives rise to a doubt as to which of the three things,
possessing distinctive features, Sound is. But if the individuality, or the specific form, of an object also were the cause of
doubt, then there might be doubts with regard to the six Categories as well; as everyone of these possesses a distinot individuality ; and in tbis way there would be no end to doubts.
With a view to this our Author says—' If it were not &c!
He recapitulates the whole thus :—' For these reasons &o!
That is to say, the ' common ' property is found along with
mutually contradictory properties; and the remembrance of
these latter can always give rise to a doubt; hence it is
the perception of the * Common' property, and not that of the
* Uncommon' property, that creates doubt.
Text (116): The Nidarcana, Instance, is of two kinds—
that which corroborates by similarity oraffirmation, and that which corroborates by dissimilarity
ro negation. The former kind consists in the recognition of the concomitance of the '[indicative
mark* in general, with the 'subject * in general.
E.g. (in the argument citedfiefore) we have the
statement—* that which has action or motion has
always been found to be a substance, as an arrow.'
The other kind of Instance consists in the recognition of the absence of the ' indicative mark'
whereverm there is absence of the •-' subject;' e. g.
{in the same argument) the statement—* anything that is not a substance has no motion, as
Being'
Commentary»
The author now proceeds to explain the character of
' Instance/ The Instance is of two kinds, &c. That statement
which points out the concomitance of the Reason with the Sub-

526

?BACASTAPADA BHÄSH1TA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

jeöt of the Inference is the Instance corroborating by affirma* I
tion; whereas the statement indicating the absence of the t
Season from everywhere where there is absence of fchei subject,,
is the Instance corroborating by negation; herein iies the
difference between the two kinds of Instance. The rest is quite
clear.
Text (117): The above definition of ' Instance' seta
aside all false or wrong Instances, For
instancef we have the argument—* Sound is etwnal, because it is immaterial ' j and in corroboration of this we meet with the ' Instance '—' whatever is found to be immaterial is also eternal,—.
e. g.y (1) the Atom, (2) Action, (3) the Dish, (4)
Darkness, (5) like ' Äkäca, and (6) f that which is
a substance has always been found to have action
or mobility' Here we have examples respectively
of the six kinds of the 'false Instance by affirmation : * viz. (1) the ' unknown indicative' (2) the
* unknown subject' (3.) 'unknown indicative and
subject' (4) not applying to its own subatratum)
(5) the unconnected or incoherent, and (6) connected tuith the contrary' Similarly we have—• that
which is noneternal is material'—as (1) actiont(2)
atom (3)' like akdca* (4) darkness, (5) like the jar,
(6) ' that which is immobile is not a substance *—
as examples respectively of the six kinds of the
'false instance by negation by contraries': viz:
(1) not excluded from the * indicativei (2) not
excluded from, the ' subject' (3) not precluded
from both, (4) not applying to its own substratum, (5) JHon-preclusive and (5) Precluded from
the contrary.
Commentary*
There are some instances which, though not really corroborating the conclusion, appear as if they were corroborative;

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

527

and as such they are like Instances ; and these ' false instances '
become excluded by the aforesaid definition of the Instance ;'
as no ' false instance ' can satisfy the conditions therein laid
down. In as much as we co\ild neither avow the wrong Instance in our own arguments, nor detect them in those of others,
unless we knew the form iu which such instances generally crop
up, the author proceeds to show some examples of these i Sound
is eternal, <&?.' Here, in this argument we have examples of
six kinds of' False Instance ' ;—(1) In the argument * Sound is
eternal because it is immaterial like the atom,1 we have an
example of the Instance not applying to the ' indicative mark ; '
as the * atom' (the Instance) is devoid of ' immateriality ' (the
indicative put forward). (2) In support of tire same argument
the citing of'action ' as the corroborative instance would be an
example of the ' Instance not applying to the Subject;' as 'action*
is devoid of' eternality.' (3) The citing of the * dish .' as au instance corroborating the same argument would be an example of
the'instance not applyiog to either the Indicative or the Object;'
as the * dish * has neither ' eternality,' the * subject/ nor ' immateriality/ the ' indicative/ (4) The. case of ' darkness ' cited
in the same connection would be- the example of the Instance
not applying to its own substratum ;' as in reality there is no
such thing as * darkness ;' and as such, wherein could the concomitance of the Subject and the Indicative be shown / (5)
If the Instance were cited in the form* like äkäga (without an
accompanying general statement.) It would be an example of
the * unconnected or incoherent Ins.tance ;' though in äkä$af
there are both ' eternaiii^r' and * immateriality/ yet all that the
arguersays is ' like Akäga,' and nod * that whatever is immaterial is eternal ;' and until the person to whom the argument is
addressed, has comprehended the peculiar relationship between
the * subject' (eternaiity) and the ' inferential indicative ' (immateriality), he could not (from the words ' like Äkäga') recognise the fact of the existence of the two in Äkäga * ; and hence
this would be a case of the ' Unconnected Instance.' (6) The

528

PRAgASTAPÄBA BHÄSHYAAiCHAP. IV. SECTION (10.).

declaration that ' whatever is a substance is found to Kavel
mobility ' would be an example of the ' Instance connected with
fche contrary ;' as in the argument c Air is a substance because!
it is mobile ' we have found ail cases of mobility to be pervaded
by substantiality ; and ail pervasion is so constituted that iti
is restricted to that which is pervaded, and it does not belong
fco both the pervader and the pervaded, like Conjunction, which j
extends equally to both members of the relationship : and the
reason for this peculiarity of pervasion lies in the fact that thej
pervader is nofc always accompanied by the. pervaded. Even
in a case of ' equal pervasion '—e. g. in the case of * noneternality'and 'causedness'—where the relation of pervasion is inter-j
changeable (both being of equal extension), though the pervaded;
also has the character of the^ pervader, yet the pervasion,
in either case, would rest in that which would be represented
as the pervaded, in that case, and not in that which would be
put forward as the pervader ; and it is always possible for this]
latter (as the pervader) to exist where the other (as the
pervaded) is absent. This has been thus declared by the
Teachers : ' Though inreality the pervaded is taken up by I
the character of the pervader, yet the pervader could not?
prove the pervaded, as it is found \n cases of the absence of
the latter, and as such would be incompatible/ Hence the
pervasion should always l>e put forward as resting on the
pervaded—i. e., in the case in question we should have itj
stated in the form' that which is mobile is a substance' (where!
' mobility' is the pervaded' and * substantiality' the pervader)— I
and not as resting on the pervader,^-i.a in the form ' thatwhich
is a substance is mobile ;' because*the pervader 'substantiality*
is not always accompanied by the pervaded ' mobility/
The compound ' lingänwmeya &c/=those of which the
' linga 'and the rest are ' asiddha,' * unknown ' or 'unrecognised/
The author proceeds to describe the ' false instances of
negation :' That which is noil-eternal, <$cc. (1) In connection
with the argument—'Sound is eternal because it is immaterial

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILABITIES.

529

as that which is material is non-eternal, as action/ the citing of,
'action' constitutes an example of the 'Contrary Instance
not precluded from the Indicative/ as Action is not material
(2) In regard to tha same argument, the citing of * atom'
would be an example of the * Contrary Instance not precluded
from the Subject */ as the ' subject;' eternality is not precluded
from the Atom (which is eternal). (3) The case of'Äkäga*
would be a'contrary instance not precluded from either the
Indicative or the Subject;' as neither ' immateriality ' nor ' eternaiity ' is precluded from Äkäga. (4) The case of ' Darkness
would be a ' contrary instance not applying to its own substratum ;' as in reality there is no such thing as ' Darkness;' and as
such wherein could the preclusion of the ' Subject' and ' Indicative' subsist? (5) The case of the-(jar* would be the 'non-precluded Contrary Instance;* though in the jar we have the preclusion of both the'Subject' (eternality) and the * Indicative'
(Immateriality), yet, as long as the arguerdoes not accompany
the citing of the instance with the general statement—' that
which is non-eternal is material,'—the preclusion of the ' Subject! and the 'Indicative'can not be duly comprehended by the
person to whom the argument is ad Iressed ; and as such the
Instance is called * non-precluded.' (6) The statement ' that
which is immobile is not a substance ' is an example of the ' Contrary Instance precluded from the contrary/ Just as the 4 Subject ' is the pervader and the ' Indicative ' the pervaded, so in
the same manner is the ' negation of the Subject' the pervaded and the ' negation of the Indicative' the pervader] so
has been declared—' the relationship of the pervader and pervaded perceived in two positive things, will be found to be reversed in the case of therr negations or contraries/ In accordance witb this law, when we have the argument—' Air is a substance because it is mobile/ if we mean to show aa instance
of the•' concomitance of contraries we should put forward the
statement—* that which is not a substance is imtnobile ;' but
the instance cited above is not in his form, but in the form—
""

38

AdHYA-CHAJP. 71 SECTION (10.)
' that which is immobile ia not a substance;' but aa a matter,
of fact, there ia no such invariable concomitance (between^
' absence of mobility' and ' unsubstantially)' as is implied ia
this assertion ; as we find io the case of Akäca, that, though it ia
immobile, yet it is a substance ; hence the instance in question is
the'Cootrary Instance precluded from Contraries/
The compound 'lingdnumeya (fee./ means those of vikorni
the Indicative &&, are not precluded; ' ägrayäriddha is that of
which the substratum is unknown,; and among the. other mem*
bers we have the Dvandva or the Copulative Compound.
Text {118): The reiteration of the concomitance
* Indicative ' in general with the * Subject* after,
the former has been perceived, in the ' Instance*
along with the ' Subject' in general,—constitute*
the Änusandhäna. That is to say, the ' Indicative ' in general is put forward {in the^ Premiss)
as a qualification of the ' Subject,' and not a&
having any potencies ; and in the ' Instance* &
is pointed out as perceived along with the qwali«
fication of the Sddhya ' {object of Inference) im
general; and the statement that reiterates the
fact of its existence in the * Subject* is what u
called the * Anüsandhäna' {the Minor Premies.)
E.g., in the same argument, the statement thai,
1
Air is mobile'; and also the statement thai
f
the Air is not immobile' which follows from
the recognition of the fact of the ' indicative' not
being concomitant with the absence of the 'subjects
Commentary.
1
The Nidarcana literally is that statement wherein iö shown]
(* nidarcyate ') the ascertained concomitance of the eddhya (the
objeet of Inference) and the sadhana (the Inferential Indicative
the HUu)\ it is this 'Instance' that has been described above|
and tke statement that points oat the existence, in the ' subject \

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

531

as qualified by the addhya, of the hetu or (the indicative) in.
general, which latter has been found in the Instance to be
concomitant with the ' subject' in geuejal,—is called the * Anubandhana,' in view of the fact that it reiterates or recalls (anusandklyate) the existence, in ihepakska (* subject'), of the hetu
('Indicative') which has been shown in tue Instance tobe invariably concomitant with the eddhya (the 'object').
The author proceeds to explain his own meaning : That is
to say <fec., after the Pratijfld (Declaration of the Conclusion)
we had the statement of the ' Indicative ;' and the latter statement served the purpose of showing that it existed in the ' Subject ' as apart from all other things, aod as such had the character of the ' hetu;' and it said uothiug as to its existence in the
' subject' as its qualification, The power of the * Indicative' to
prove the ' nddhya' consists in its negative and positive invariable concomitance, as also in the fact of its qualifying the 'subject;' and this latter fact is not expressed either by the
Pratijiid (the Declaration of the Conclusion) or by the statement of the 'Reason;' and thus the 'Reason' has not its
necessary potency fully established ; so that in the Instance it is
pointed out as concomitant with the general qualifications of the
sddltya; and after that it has to be shown again to exist in the
' Subject;' and the statement that does this is called the ' Anuiandlidna.'
The sense of ail this may be thus explained : Words
are used by one person for the sake of another person ; and hence
their use would follow the bent of the desires and wants of the
person to whom they are addressed. And when this person
has heard the sddhya, ' what has to be proved/ (put forward
in the Declaration), he wants to learn the sddhana, the
'Reason'—'by what this is proved;1 and he can not yet
want to know the potency or capability of the Reason; as a
desire for the knowledge of the capabilities of(a thing can arise
only after the thing itself has become known. When this desire

532

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

bas been evinced, the other person mentions the ' Reason,'!
(in the ' apadecä'); but this statement merely mentions th
Reason, and does not say anything as to its subsisting as a quallj
Scation in the * Subject ;' for the simple reason that the same •
word could not signify two things (the mere form of the Reason,
as also the fact of its subsisting in the Subject). When the per>|
son knows the Reason, there arises in his mind a desire to know I
its capabilities ; aud upon his evincing this desire,—in as muchi
aa a due cognition of the sadhya would not be possible withouti
the recognition of its invariable concomitance, this concomitance]
is expressed by means of the vydptivacana (the statement of?
invariable concomitance), between the sadhya and the ketu, put|
forward in the ' Instance '; and the capability of the * Reason 'j
being thus known, the man next wishes to know if the Reason,
endowed with this capability .subsists in the ' subject.' Aftex\
the ' Instance J h*s been cited, it becomes necessary to recog-|
nise |he fact of the ' Reasou' subsisting in and qualifying the^
'Subject'; and it is in the -Upanaya or Anusandkwna., thei
' Minor Premiss/ that this fact is put forward.
'
Objection : u The fact of the Reason subsisting in the Subject is implied by its very capability o( beiug put forward aa a
' Reason '; as a Reason subsisting io another substratum (and!
not.in the Subject) would not prove anything, and as such be
no ' Reason ' at all."
>
Reply: For the matter of that the mere capability of the1
Reason to be put forward as such also implies the 'invariable
concomitance/ the ' major Premiss ; ' aa anything not RO concomitant cannot be a true 'Reason'; hence in accordance
with your reasoning, it would not be necessary to put forward
the ' Instance ' either.
*
Objection : " It is quite possible for the Asädhärana Indic ative to be put forward, through some misconception, aa the
' Reason ' ; and hence the mere fact of an indicative having been
j u t forward as such would not necessarily imply the necessary

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

533

'invariable concomitance'; and hence it is necessary for this
latter to be put forward by means of the ' lustance.' "
Reply: We often find that even when the Indicative does
not subsist in the * Suhject,' it is put forward, by mistake, as a
' Reason'; and hence the mere fact of the Reason being put
forward does not necessarily imply its subsistence in the 'Subject;*
consequently it becomes necessary to point out that the ' Indicative ' cited in the ' Instance ' does subsist in the * Subject *;
and to this end the statemenc of the ' Anusandlidna becomes
necessary.
Objection : " We often find that the ' Asiddha* or ' Unknown ' Indicative is, through some misconception, put forward
in the ' Anuaandhdna' also; and as such, how could this
absolutely prove the faot of the Indicative subsisting in the
< Subject.' ?"
Reply : So far as that is concerned, we find the ' Asiddha'
Indicative often put forward, through some mistake, as being'iuvariably concomitant'; and under the circumstances, how
could the mere 'statemeut of iuvariable concomitance' absolutely prove that there is a real concomitance ?
Objection: "The 'concomitance' is ascertained, in the
* Instance/ in accordance with the means of knoxoledge affording
the cognition of the ' Major Premiss '; ami it is not ascertained by the mere * statement' (of this Premiss); as mere statement
could be made with regard to any thing and every thing (and
as such it could not prove anything."
Reply: In the case of the 'Anusandhäna* also, the fact of
the Reason subsisting in the ' Subject' would be ascertained in
accordance with the means of knowledge affording the cognition
of the ' Minor Premiss '; and not by the mere statement of the
premiss.
Objection : "Bat the iotegrity of the means of knowledge
affording the cognition of the Minor Premiss^is dnly kept up

534

PRAQASTAPÄDA BSÄSHYA-CHAP. VL (SECTION (10.)

J

by the mere fact of the putting forward of the ' Reasonf not ^
being otherwise explicable or possible."
#
Reply : In the same manner the integrity of the 'means of If
knowledge ' affording the cognition of the Major Premiss' would :':t
be preserved by the same fact of the putting forward of the
' Reason' not being otherwise explicable.
Objection : " In as much as the Statement of the Reason is
for a totally different purpose, it has not the capability of putting forward or indicating the 'invariable concomitance ' (Major
Premiss ; and hence it is that this puuing forward is done by
means of the c Instance.' "
Reply: If it be so, then in the case in question please
apply the same course of reasoning; and there is no need for
making unnecessary assumptions.
Objection: "All right; let there be the Anusandhdna
but, in that case the putting forward of the Reason would be
absolutely useless."
Reply : Not so ; if there is no ' Statement of the Reason,
there can be no idea of the ' Indicative ' as proving tbe conclusion (and hence having the character of the true ' Reason ')
and as such there being no possibility of any desire on the part
of the enquirer to learn of its capabilities, there would be no
loom for the putting forward of the * Instance ' &c. Says the
Nydyabhdshya: ' When the Reason does not exist Whose indicative character would be shown ?'
The Author cites an instance of the 'Anusanddna ': 'E.g.
in the same argument <kc* Having cited the instance of the
positive ' Annsandhdna,' he cites one of the negative
s
Anusandhdna '—( Also the statement dec*
Text (119) : The ' subject * having been mentioned as the
olject of Inference, and yet not being fully aacertained as such, we have a reiteration of the Con»
elusion {Pratijftä) for the purpose of bringing

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

535

about certainty in the mind of the other person ;
and this Reiteration is called the * Pratydmnaya*
That is to say, something is at first pointed out
as to be proved ; and when it is not known quite
for a certainty to be such as is wanted to be
proved, then—for the sake of such persons as have
acquired the faculty of recognising the truth, by
means of the * Reason' and other aforesaid
1
Factor8 ' of the syllogism,—we have a reiteration of the conclusion ; and this is tvhat is called
the * Pratyämnäya* E. g. (in the same argument)
the statement * therefore Air is a substance.*
As long as this reassertion is not made, ncne of the
other ' Factors ' either individually or collectively
has the power to express what is meant to be expressed by it
"
Objection: " But what is expressed by it may certainly
be implied by the other members.'*
Reply: No so ;as if it were so, then we would have
many undesirable irregularities. As, (if we
were to depend upon implications), then after
stating the conclusion (in the Pratijnd) it would
be necessary to assert the ' Reason' only ; as the
learned are sure to remember the necessary ' invariable concomitance ' {sought to be put forward
in the ' Instance1), and thence to deduce the
necessary premisses and conclusions.
For these reasons the argument must be regarded as
ending with the * Pratyämnäya ' ( or * 3igamana'),
Question: ' How soV
Answer : For instance, in the first place we have the
c
statement of the conclusion1 in the form—'Sound

536

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

t

is evanescent'—wherein we have only * sound*
mentioned as having the uncertain qualification-?
of ' evanescence'; secondly we have the statement
of the l Reason ' in the form—' because it always
follows from effort?—wherein we have the
mere mention of a property calculated to prove
the * evanescence ' ; thirdly we have the ' statement
of the Instance' in the form—' in the world all
that is found to follow from effort is also found
to be evanescent, as the jar'—wherein we have
merely the mention of the. concomitance of the
*Reason' ('following from effort1) with the ' Object
of Inference' (' evanescence ') in general; and
similarly we may have the ' statement of the
negative Instance * in the form—' the eternal is
never found to follow from any effort, as the
Al'dca'—wherein is pointed out the absence of
the ( Reason' in the absence of the ' object ';
fourthly ive have the statement of the ' Anusandhdna ' in the two forms of affirmation and negation—1 sound is found to follow from effort' and
* sound is not found like Akdga to be independent of effort'—wherein we have the reiteration
of the ' Reason' in general, whose powers have
been ascertained by means of affirmation and
negation, in ' sound'; and tlien alone fifthly and
lastly have we the certain conclusion (the Pratyämnäya ') in the form—' therefore sound must
be evanescent.' And thus we find itiat it is only
in this way that we find the last * member1
affording the desired final conclusion; and hence
we find that it is only by means of the 'fivemembered * argamtnt that something known for
certain by the speaker can be proved to another
person.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

537

Such then, ia the Inference * for the sake of others*
(IX-i-i, 2.)
Commentary.
Tbe author proceeds to describe the ' Pratyämndya.1 The
«tatemenb of the ' PratijncL' having pointed out the ' property
or character of the 8ddhya* as the thing whose existence in the
Subject is to be proved by the members of the argument,—the
presence of this Sädhya in the Subject remains uncertain, until
it is reiterated a3 subsisting in the * Subject;' and this reiteration
is what is called Pratydmndya,—the word meaning literally
that statement whereby there ia a repeated mention (of the
sädhya) And this * reiteration ' of something already mentioned before is for the purpose of bringing about a certainty in
the mind of the other person. That is to say, in putting forward
an argument-we state merely the * object of Inference' the ' 8ddhya, as subsisting ia the ^subject;' but there caunot yet be any
certainty with regard to the subsistence ; as the mere statement
of the conclusion does not prove it; but when the ' Reason' haa
been stated, and -the capabilities of the Reason duly pointed out
(in the ' Instance,' the ' major premiss, a certaiuty as to the
conclusion is broughtabout by means of the * Pratydmndya;'
and herein lies its usefulness. That is what the author meaus
by the explanation—'[that is to Bay &c.' At the beginning of the
argument the person to whom it is addressed ia not convinced
of the subsistence of the * object' in the ' subject; * but when the
threefold potentiality of the ' Reason ' has been shown to him
by means of the three * members'—the ' Reason/ the '-Inbtaace'
or ' major premiss ' and the ' Anusandhdna* or the 'minor premiss '—and this is followed by the * reiteration' of the * object *
now become real, along with its apprehension and potentialities,—
the argument becomes complete in all its details, and thus brings
about the desired conviction1. It is for the purpose of bringing
about this conviction that we have the reiteration of the conclusion. The example of this is—-" therefore Air is a substance '

538

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

•;«

as closing the argument referred to in connection with the
members,'
In answer to the question—" When the conclusion is proved
by the ' Reason* and the other three ' members/ what is the
uae of the ' Pratydmndya' ?—the author says : ' as long as this
rtassertion is not made &c. That is to say, everyone of *be
three * members/ Prdttjnd and the rest, is complete and rests
within itself; and until the Pratyämnäya is put forward;
they do not combine towards the indicating of aoy single idea;
for the simple reason that each of them has a distinct sphere
of its own ; when however, the Pratyämnäya has been stated,
there is in the mind of the listener a feeling of necessity of
connection, whereby he tends to combine all the'members/
which, thus coming into the relationship of mutual subserviency» are enabled to indicate the one conclusion wanted ; and
thus the Pratydmndya must be regarded as a necessary factor
in every inferential argument.
Another objection is put forward :"Wkat is expressed byt
the Pratyämnäya might be implied by the other ' members.
That is to say, the accessory details in the 'Inference for the
sake of another* are the same as those in that for one's own
sake ; and the only difference is that in the case of the latter the
whole argument is recalled to the mind by the person himself,
while in that of the former, it has to be made intelligible to
the other person; and for ourselves we find the conclusion
tobe duly indicated and proved by the comprehension of the
potentialities of the Reason ; and for another person also this
alone should be sufficient to indicate the conclusion; and
the statement of the argument has its sole end in the pointing
out of the ' Indicative * (as the Reason); and it has already been
shown that the * Indicative ' as subsisting in, and being invariably
concomitant with, the ' Subject/ is put forward by the * Reason'
and the other three 'members 1 ; and this being enough for
thedtie comprehension of the conclusion, there remains nothing
to be done by the * nigamana' or Pratyämnäya!*

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

539

The author replies to the above objection: * Not so &cJ
What the argument does is to point out merely the potentiality
of the Indicative and not the Object: but its potentiality docs
not consist merely in ' invariable concomitance J and ' subsistence
ia the Subject'; as eveu when these two characters are present,
we find—ia the case of the ' Prakaranaaama ' and x Kälätyäyapadishta Reason—that it does not prove the conclusion; the
* potentiality ' in addition to the aforesaid two characters, must
also consist in its ' being such as (1) has not its cognition set
aside by a more valid means of knowledge, and (2) has no
equally valid Reason to the contrary ; and so long as the presence of these two characters is not duly proved, there always
remains the suspicion of there being a Reason to the contrary;
and so long as this suspicion remains, even though the Reason
may be shown to subsist in the Subject, there would be no
conviction with regard to the desired conclusion ; and it is for
this reason that the Pratydmnlya is put forward by way of
indicating the absence of any 'reasons to the contrary ;' and when
«he absence thereof has been proved, it follows that the Reason
is free from the fallacies of' Prakaranasama ' and Käldtyayä
padishta;' aod then it is that the Reason, whose potentialities
have been meutioned before, comes to establish the conclusion ;
and thus is the usefulness of the ' Pratyamnaya' established.
As what the author means to controvert is the view that
the * potentiality of the reason,' even though not explicity mentioned, would be implied,—it becomes necessary for him to support his view by examples. And to this end he declares that, as
soon aa the ' Reason ' will have been put forward after the Pratijftä, the learned would at once, without any further statements,
remember the * invariable concomitance,1 and therefrom deduce
the necessary conclusion. That is to say, the ' Inference for the
sake of another person ' is not put forward for the person who
already knows what is to be proved; as for a such person» the
argument would be absolutely useless; then again, it is not possible for us to know how much of the matter is known, and how

540

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

much not known, to the person to whom we address tlie
ment; as the state of the iniud of one person can hardly be known"
to another. Nor too could each argument be framed in accord«?
ance with the capacity of each person to whom it may be addressed ; as each person may be possessed of peculiar capacities.!
Consequently when a man should want to convince another person, it becomes necessary for him to put forward as mauy state-J
ments aa would establish the indicative validity of the Reasoni
in the natural course of things ; and he should not mind the.
idiosyncracies of the person whom he may seek to convince.5
Thus has this been declared : c A fact is to be put forward to*
be proved only in the form that it is known to exist in, and
not in accordance with the ideas eutertained about it by thej
persons to whom it may be addressed ; as who could ever properly follow the bent of the mistaken ideas of the thing enter«,
tained by others ?'
The author now sums up the whole subject: * For these rea
eons &c* That is to say, as it is only wheu the Pratyämnäya
has been stated that the full significance of the ' Reason ' incomprehended, the argument must be regarded as fully compreheuded only after that statement. Or, we may construe the.
sentence thus: Inas much as without the statement of the
Pratyämväyd there is no recognition of the absence of rea-«
sons to the contrary, the thing—i.e. the full significance of
the * Reason'—must be regarded as ending with that statement.
Haviog described each of the * members' separately, the
author proceeds, by means of a question, to show their nature |
collectively : 'How <&o! The question aa to äouad being evanes- I
cent or otherwise having arisen, there comes in the mere statement of the * conclusion '—' sound is evanescent'—which speaks
of sound a« qualified by the as yet uncertain character of
evanescence, Theo tjbere arises, on the part of the enquirer
a desire to know the ' reasou' for this conclusion; and to
satisfy this want we have the statement of the ' reason '—* because it follows after effort,' i.e. * not existing before the effort

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

541

to utter it, it comes into existence after this effort has been put
forth/ and in this what is pointed out is only a property that
would prove the evanescence. What is meant by üiia * only ' is
that this statement says nothing, either as to the fact of the
' Reason ' subsisting in the ' subject' sound, or as to its * in*
variable concomitance ' with ' evanescence.' When the enquirer
has learnt the * reason,' he wishes to learn in what way that
reason indicates the conclusion ; and in order to satisfy this
wish we put forward the ' Instance ' in this form—'in this world,
everything that has been seen to follow after an effort has also
been found to be evanescent,'—which points out the mere fact
of a general concomitance between the ' thing to be proved1
(evanescence) and the * reason ;' here the word 4 mere ' is meant
to indicate that the 'instance ' says nothing beyoud the general
concomitance. Side by side with this we have the negative 'Instance/—'all that \s eternal is never found to be brought about
by au effort/—which shows that wherever the * thing to be proved'is absent the'Reason' is also absent. After this, the enquirer
says—' well, I understand that anything following after an
effort is evanescent, but I do not yet know-whether or not the
character pufc forward belongs to sound ;' and in answer to this,
we have the statement of the Anusandhanaj—' Sound is a
thing that follows after an effort;' (hat is to say, just as the jar
follows after effort, so does Sound also ; and Sound is not like
Akdca which is not the effect of any^ effort; and this Anusandhäna serves the purpose of indicating the tact of the subsistence
in Sound, of the character of being produced from effort
the negative and positive concomitances of which character
have been pointed out before, Even after all ihis, the enquirer might reason thus: "In the case of the Instance, 'all that
is produced is not hot, e. g. the jar/ we find that even though
some sort of an external invariable concomitance is possible,
yet a fiery substance, though produced, cannot be regarded as
not-hot, because of such a conclusion being contrary to other
means of right knowledge ;and in the same manner, it may be

542

PßAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

j

that though there may be such an external invariable concotni- •»
tanceas that,' whatever follows after an effort is evanescent, yet.J
it may be that Sound, though following after an effort, may not!
be evanescent, in view of arguments to the contrary.' In an- ,
8wer to this suspicion of a contrary reasoning and conclusion,— |
a suspicion that would shake the indicative charactar of the |
* reason,'—it becomes necessary to reiterate, by means of the |
Pratyämuäya, the conclusion that, 'Sound is evanescent ;r
which means that,' in as much as there is no means of knowledge indicating the eternality of sound, it must be regarded as
evanescent.1
Thus then, what the Pratyämnäya does is to point out
the ground for believing in the absence of any valid means of
cognising the contrary of the conclusion,—(his being done by r
its precluding all possibility of a contrary conclusion. And when
this absence has been pointed out, and proved, all suspicion
to the contrary is set aside; and the 'Reason,' whose invariable
concomitance has been shown before, being summed up as subsisting in the ' Subject,' leads the enquirer, through the valid
means of cognising the necessary concomitance, to a full recognition of the conclusion, free from all doubts and uncertainties ;
and he does not want anything more for the purpose of being
convinced. And thus it is by means of the ' Pratyämnäya '
that we get at the finale of the conclusion desired to be proved
—vis., * Sound is evanescent.'
The SaJhyavtilcyarlhavadid explain the usefulness of the
Pratyämnäya in the followiog manner : " The * prodocedoeas
of 8oimd is of a totally different character from the ' producedneas' of the jar ; hence finding that the 'producedness' of the
jar is pervaded by or invariably concomitant with, ' evanescence/ one may be t>ewildered as to whether, by analogy, the
same might be the case with Sound also; and .even when fco
auch a bewildered person it has been« shown that the ' indicative '
(' producedness') subsists in the 'Subject* (' Sound ')* and

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

543

that it is invariably concomitant with * evanescence/—be is
not sufficiently couvioced of the conclusion that 'Sound is
evanescent'; hence to this end is put forward the ' Prdtydmndya —' Therefore ( tasmdt sound is evanescent'; wherein
the pronoun * tasmdt' serves the purpose of remiading the
enquirer of the means of coguising tbe invariable coucomitance
previously cognised in a general way, and also of proving
the required 'evanescence of Sound' Thus then, the sense
of the Pratyämnäya comes to be that because the fact of producedne88 beiug accompanied by evanescence cognised before
did not refer to the producedness of any particular thing, but
to producedness in general, therefore being produced, Sound is
evanescent"
In accordance with this view the Minor Premiss itself serves
to set aside the fallacies of Prakaranasama and Käiätyayäpadishta; as the very character of the true * Minor Premiss'
consists in its being free from satpratipaksha and ßädha,
Others again hold that the word ' tasmäfc' (in the
Pratyämnäya) has a threefold signification, its full implication being thus stated: (1) Because all that is produced is
found to be evanescent, (2) because sound is produced and
(3) because there is no possibility of • contrary reasons' or
1
negation,'—therefore on account of its producedness, Sound
is evancesent'*
The author sums up tbe whole section : 'For these reasons
&c. That is to say. in as much as ifc is only when all the five
(
members' have been put forward that there is a full recognition of tbe potentialities of the ' Reason,' tending to
due conviction with regard to the conclusion,—and as nothing
more is needed for this purpose,—it follows that a desired
conclusion is proved by us by putting forward an argument
composed of 4 five members/ neither more nor less; and
thus it becomes proved that the * Inferential argument for

544

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

|j

the sake of another person} consists of the statement of the '
aforesaid five ' members/
There *re some people who hold than ' Sense-perception ia |
the only means of right knowledge,; and hence deny this charac«
t£r to 'Inference.' To these people we put the following question : Does the character of the valid means of knowledge
belong to the singie sensuous perception that is experienced at
the particular time, or does it belong to all sensuous perceptions ?
The aaid validity could not belong to the one perception only,
as there can lie no reason for denying the validity of other perceptions brought about by similar means and under similar circumstances. If then, validity be attributed to all sensuous
perceptions, the past and the future, as well as that experienced
by other persons,-^-then we should like to know how the validity
of ail these come to be recognised.
" We regard all these perceptions to be valid because we |
find them to be exactly similar in kind to our own perception, |
of whose validity we are -fully convinced."
By this you admit the evidential authority of Inferences
with regard to the nature of things [That is to say, the reasoning. ' The perception of another person is valid because it is \
of the same kind as our own perception' is purely inferential].
The evidential authority of Inference may also be proved %
by putting forward the following alternatives: For whom is\j
the validity of Sense-perception sought to be established— '
for one who already knows it and admits it ? or for one who
does not know acd admit it ? It cannot be for the former;
as in his case the proving is not needed. Then as for one
who does not know it, how do you come to know the ignorance \
of another person ? Certainly it is not cognisable by means ^
of any sense-organ.
rj
" We infer his ignorance from his declarations."
I
f
Then you admit the evidential authority of the inference t.

QUALITIES : SIMILAKITIES AND DISSlMILAtllTXES»

545

of effect (from its cause). [The man's acting in a certain
manner is taken as the effect of his ignorance, which is thus
inferred from its effect].
Then again, by, what means do you seek to prove that Inference is not a -valid means of knowledge ?* As for Senseperception it has always a positive eutity for its objective and is
hence always of an affirmative character ; and as such it could
not prove the negation, or absence of Inference as a means of
knowledge.
" We conclude that it is not a means of cognition, simply
because^we do not perceive it."
In that case you admit the authority of Inferences based
upon Non-perception. All this has been thus summed up by
the Bauddhas: 'The existence of another means of
knowledge, is proved by.—(1) its similarity to another
means of knowledge universally recognised, (2) the fact
of our being cognisant of other people's ideas and cognitions
aod (3) by negation also at times.' That is to say, for these
three reasons, it must be admitted that apart from ' Sense-perception ' there is a distinct means of knowledge, in the shape of
Inference, based upon the c nature of things,' on. c Effects '
*ud on ' Nou-perception/
Text (120): A definite cognition, brought about by the
due perception of the special features, is called
' Nirnaya;' and this is opposed to Doubtful Cognition. It is O)dy this definite cognition that can
be either 'perceptive* of * inferential* That
which is produced by a sensuous perception of
the special features, and sets aside all doubts,
is the 'perceptive judgment'/ e g when wt
see a certain object standing before us, we
tnatr perceive only the tall mas, which is a pro* Th« printed raiding it eridoatly wroag : * Aumänam pramänam <tc.,'
docs sot gir« toy «esi«.

54$

PRAQASTAPÄL>A BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

%

"petty common between the pole and the man, and J
not perceive any of the features belonging sped- 1
fically to either ; a ad then recalling to our mind
the (other) features common to both, we have the
doubtful cognition, as to whether the object before 1
us is a pole of a man ; after a time, perceiving 4
that the object has a head and hand* &c, we come ?
to the definite cognition that it is a ' mi a ;' and J
this is a case of the ' perceptive Definite C >gnitvm.\
Then again, seeing only a pair of horns in a j
thicket (and not any other parts of the animals j
body), toe have the doubtful coy n't t ion th< it it is a j
cow or a Gavaya ; and then noticing the presence
of the dewlap, xoe have the Definite Cognition that
it is a ' cow '; and this is a ca*e of the ' inferential' J
Definite Cognition: (IX-ii-12 ; X-i-3.)
Commentary*
Some people regard Definite Cognition to be a distinct]
means of knowledge ; and in regard to this view the author says •
'A definite cognition, &G! That is to say, in a case where the
hon-perceptioQ of specific features has given rise to a doubtful
cognition, the subsequent perception of such features bring«;
About a definite cognitiou. which is called v Nirnayäj 'Definite
Cognition.'It is called the 'opposite of Douhtful Cognition,' because"
as soon as it appears, it removes the previous * doubtful cognition.
AR Mandana flf icra has declared in his Vihhramaviveka,—' Ai
soon as the pole has been definitely cognise. 1' there is no longer,
any doubtful cognition based upon mere tallness.' Though every?
definite cognition may be called' Sirnayal (no matter whether
it does or does not set aside a previous doubt), yet in as much;
*s a certainty is generally known to follow after an uncertainty^
the author has called it' opposed to Doubtful Cognition.'
I
With a view to explain his own general statement, the
author next shows that Nirnaya is included in Sense-perception

QUALITIES : ÖIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

547

and Inference. The definite cognitioa with regard to objects
perceived by the senses IF * Perceptive Nirnaya,' and that with
regard to inferable objects ia ' inferential ' Nirnaya.
NOTIS.—(a) When we perceive the horn, the doubtful cognition is, due to the
following inferential reasoning: ' The animal before us it either * e«w or &
Gavny.i, aa it litt* hur as.' And then the perception of the dewlap leads
us to th«
following Infeience. * It must be cow, because it has dewlap.1 This ia called
' inferential definite cognition/ a» the «ntire animal &
i not actuailj seen.
(b) It ia not quite clear who regard ' Nirnnya ' a« a diatiuyfc meuua of knowiedg«.
SMRITI- REMEMBRANCE.

Ttftt (121): From the contact of the soul and the mind
as aided by swc'i causes as tkn perception
of an 'Indicative,' * desire' (for remnnbtriny) and
•' associated ideas,' and the Like^ and from a faculty
produced by distinct cog nit ion, by repetition and
by an impressive regard (for the object concerned),—thevK arises a lie membra ace uf objects seen,
heard or eccpe*'>enced (in ferre<l) in the past, which
becomes the cauae of the recaU'inj of what remains
(of a previous cognition), of desire, of associated
or secondary remembrance, and of aversion.
Commentary.
The author now proceeds to describe knowledge in the
form of Remembrance : The expression ' and the like ' has beeu
added with a view to include franidhdna, * Close Attention'
and others enunciated in tiie A'yäyavütra (Adh. Ill Ähvika
2/, Sutra 43). The 'contact of the soul and the mind ' aided
by these constitutes the cause or source of Remembrance. For
thiff ( Contact' the peculiarity that makes it a cause of Remembrance consists in the ' perception of the Indicative' &c; as a
mere contact of the soul and the mind cannot bring about any
Remembrance.
The author next points out that like the ' perception of the
Indicative,' ' Faculty ' also is an instrumental cause of Re mem-

548

TRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄöHYA-CHAP. Tl. SECTIOK (10):

brance. Remembrance follows from a peculiar faculty of th<
mind ; and this faculty is produced —(I) by distinct cognition
as from the cognition of the touch of blades of grass iö motion4
(2) sometimes it happens that even a distinct cognition doe«
oot produce any perceptible impression on the mind, as
find in the case of a chapter of the Veda read for the first
time; but in this case when there is a repetition of what
las been cognised once, a distinct impression is produced on the
mind, which fixes the chapter in the memory (3) sometime!
when we see a strange object, the cognition produced i» so
impressive that even though the object is seen but once, it i&
remembered for all times to come.
With regard to objects seen &c.,' This points out th«
objects of Remembrance. ' Seen'=cognised directly by th<
senses; 'heard* =cognised only through hearing from ochen
* experienced ' = Inferred.
Becomes the means dec' This serves to point out th<
effects of Remembrance. £e*ha is that which remains behind!
Anuvyavatäya' is functioning afterwards and by tl
eonapound Ctshänuvyavasäya ' (where cesha qualifies xnw
y a va say a
which literally means the ' recalling of whaj
remains benind,' is meant the cognition of the ( object of tli
Inference, which is not included in the first cognition of
Inferential Indicative
and the meaning of this is the 'rememfyrqnct* of the invariable concomitance (of that object with thai
Indicative). The ' rememlranee of a certain olj-cfc bavin]
ntforded pleasure in the past become« the mean« of a * desire
for tnat object. The ' remembranct of the first word of a «en
tence become» the means of the 'associated remembrance
$ne second word. And the ' remembrance' of an object
produ ced pain io the past becomes the cause of an
*o it.
I
4 Ad remembrance also appears in the form «f that
('That tbing which I bad «een kc>,'). And io a& «u^h as u

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

549

all Remembrance the object is recognised as having been known
in the past, Remembrance is called 'atitavishayä,' 'pertaining to
past objects.*
It is for this same reason of its pertaining to past object«*
that Remembrance is not regarded as a ' mean« of knowledge,;
as all that it does is to point out an object ad known in tks
past and as such it depends, in the matter of making its
objective known, upon previous coguitions (and as such only
making known an object that is already known, it cannot be
regarded as a means of knowledge which is a name given
only to such means as afford knowledge of things not otherwise
known). As for Inferential Coguition, though that also depend«
upon another cognition for its accomplishment, yet in the
matter of bringing about a knowledge of its own objective it is
wholly independent *. e tbough the inference is based upon
the previous knowledge of concomitance &c, yet it always
leads to a conclusion the matter of which is wholly unknown
uutil pointed out by that same Inference, which thus, with
regard to this latter, does not merely recall a previous cogmtioa
as is done by Remembrance. This has been thus declared' in,
the TantvjLvdrtikx by the superhumanly intelligent Teacher:
It is only the cognition of some previous cognition that is called
Stnrti, Remembrance, and hence we can never accept it as true
in the absence of such previous cognition * [I-iu-1, Translation
Page 105]- This same idea has been also expressed iu the foi
lowing Kärlkä (CLokavärtika):' There (iu the case of Remembrance} to the previous cognition, (which is the origin of the
Remembrance) belongs the character of the correct means of
knowledge; and the purpose of Remembrance lies in the mere
lecilling of that previous cognition* [Anumana Verse 158,
Translation. Page 204]. Some people hold the non-evidential
character of Remembrance to be due to the fact of its not being
directly produced by a real object: but for such people there
would be no evidential authority for Inference* with regard
to past and future object» (which cannot be regarded as rtal at

550

PRA£ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI SECTION (10).

the time of the inference) and they cannot escape from this
objection.
i
NOTES : — (1) The Nayäsülras referred to in the commentary are
|SQ3V2T;v§tS?:4KVTTbe first of these Sutras simply states the fact that Remembrance belongs ro the self ; as it is the self alone that is endowed
with consciousness ; and in the next Sütra Gautama declares that
Remembrance follows from suoh causes as fränidhann and
the rest ; and here we find stated in detail the various grounds
of association leading to Kemetntirance. Each of these is thus
explained by Vätayäyana and Vä<:haspati Mi<jra ; (1)• ' Pranidkäna*
is the steady ng or concentrating of the mind with view ro recill
something to the mind ; that is to say, when we wish to remember something, we withdraw the mind from all other objects and
concentrate it on the various distinguishing features of the one
object intended to be recalled ; and this concentration is called
* Pranidhana»' (2) * Nibandha7 — When a number of things are
treated of in ihe same work ('composition'), the association
thus established among them makes each one of them bring
the other to the m nd. (3) iAbhpa^a—is the name given to
that peculiar chameter of the Self, which in the form of a
faculty or Impression is produced by a constant repetition or
repeated penderiug ovvr the same idea. This faculty thus becomes
a means whereby the idea and its object is remembered easily,
Toia Abhyäia included Adara (great regard and 'Pratyaya' Impressive cognition) also; as these also tend to create in the self a
faculty that becomes the means of remembering; when we have a
great regard for a certain thing, or vhen the cognition that we
have of it is of a character that leaves a lasting impression on
the mini, there appears a certain faculty that fixes those objects
in our memory. (I) * Linga '—An indicative or distinguishing
mark ; everything has certain features whereby it is more easily
remembered. ThU Indicative mark is generally of four kinds :
(a) A thing is often remembered hy the help of sometbiog
where wirbt it may have been found to have been in contaot,—

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

551

f *., having seen a cart with a particular horse, on ft former
occasion, seeing that horse, we remember the carnage ; (h) it i«
remembereU by means of something wherein it has been found
to inhere ; for instance, having seen the yarn along with the
piece of cloth, whenever afterwards we see the yarn, we at once
lemember the cloth. (c) When twa thinga have been found
to in here together in the same object, the perception of one
culls the other to the miud ; /, i f buying found whiteness and
coolness together in a piece of ice, whenever we see whilenes* it
brings »m i<iea of cool neu to the mind ; or having seen the hands
ami feet of a n» <n, when we see his hands we remember
his feet also. (d\ O-ie thing is often found to bring about the
idea of its contrad ctory ; for instance, on experiencing extreme
heat, we an? at o"ce put to mind of extreme cold. (5)
A certain distinguishing feature fixed by convention often serves
to bring to the mind the name of the family to whi»h one belongs,
j . i. having found by experience that the animals belonging
to a certain fam'ly are marked, by a particular kind of mark
ou the forehead, whenever we see an animal bearing that mark,
we aie led to remember the family. {6} Of two similar things,
one reminds us of the other ; for instance, the picture of a man
reminds us of the man himself. (7) By ownership a thing is
remembered ; for instance on seeing the servant we remember the
master, or vice versa (8) Of two things related to one another
one reminds us of the other ; as the sight of the son reminds us
of the father. We often remember a thing through immediate
sequence ; /. t., 6n>iin£ that the railway train leaves immediately
after the whistling, as soon as we hear the whistling we are
reminded of the leaving of the train; or being accustomed to
take our food immediately after bath, the bath reminds ua
of the foo i ('0) ' he Separation from a man reminds us of him.
(11) The identity of function is another cause of action ; /. i.f
finding that a certain set of eleven men forn-s a football team,
on seeing nny one of them we remember the rest.
(I) Of
two persons opposed to each other, the sight of one reminds ua
of the other opponent, (13) An excellence of some sort becomes
a mean« of remeinberance ; /. •',. a stulent wishing to learn »
«erta n subject remembers the teacher famous in that branch of
learning 0*) ^ e likelihood of gain from a certain person put»

552

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTIOK (10).

us in mind of that person. (15) The covering of a thing reminds
us of that thing, /. t., the sight of the scabbard leads us to
remember the »word. Similarly pleasure and pain, affection and
aversion, fear and want put us in mind of their respective objects,
the action of a man remind» us of the man, as the moving of the
chariot reminds us of the driver; and Virtue and Vice aUo
remind us of their effects. These are a few of the special instances of the general lasv of association, which is enunciated as—

(2) (a) Patanjali in his Yoga-sütra has defined it as the non-abandonment by the mind of the object that has been once cognised (l*ü).
This definition puts us in mind of the declaration of Bishop Hall,
that, '« memory is the great keeper of the Rolls of the soul, a p<»wer
that can make amends for the speed of time, in causing him to
leiwe behind him those things which else he would so carry away
as if they had nut been."
The Vedantis holi that Remembrance does not depend upon
our will ; it is in this that it differs from Reflection. Their
opinion is that no sooner the necessary conditions present themselves than the Remembrance appears, whether we wish it or no
(Viüaranaprameyasamr/rnha, p 151).
Remembrance U not regarded as one of the ' valid means of
knowledge,1 Pramann. And on this point the Njävamaiijari says—
* The invalidity of Remembrance is due, not to the fact of its
pertaining to an object that hus already been cognised before, but
to the fact of the object whereof it affords the knowledge not
having a real exigence at the time that we have the Remembrance.
Soon this point we find a difference of opinion between our commentator and the Nyäyamanjttri. Remembrance enters as a necessary factor in all Inferential and Verbal cognitions ; and as such we
cannot regard it as absolutely invalid , all that is meant is that it
is not an independent Prvmänn.
Some writers hold that the direct cause of remembrance does cot
consist in the sansbdra, which thus stands in the same relation to
Remembranoe as ten*e-eonta§t does to Sense-perception, gankara
Mic,r& in the LTpa$kdra (OB autra LT-ii-S) ityg that a particular kind

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

553

of conjunction ia the non-material eause, saii3kara the instrumental
cauae aud the Self the material cause, of Hemembraitce.
(3) It will be of interest to notice what some of the western
philosophers have got to say iti this connection.
Professor Fleming says —«' Consciousness testifies that when a
thought has once heen present to the mind, it may again become
present to it, with the knowledge that it has formerly been present;
when this takes place we are sail to remember, and the faculty of
which remembrance is the act is memory.*1 [It is for this reason
that i smirti ' cannot be rightly translated as ' memory ' ].
" This faculty ('of memory) implies two things : a capacity
4>t retaining knowledge, and a power of recalling to our thoughts
when we have occasion to apply it to use" (Stewart, Ulement*
vr-i).
[This is opposed to the Vedantic conception that Remembrance is wholly independent of our effort].
•< The next faculty of the mind (after perception), whereby jt
makes a further progress towards knowledge ia that which I call
retention. This is done in two ways : 6r«t by keeping the idea
which is called contemplation [the • pränidkäna ' of the Nyäyasütra
explained above]. The other way of retention is the power t«
revive again or our minds those ideas which, after in>pi iutmg, bare
disappeared " (Locke Essuy II-x-i).
In- connection with the 'invalidity' of Remembrance, on
which so mtuh stress 1ms heen laid above, Ire may note^ne- opinion
of Hobbes who holds that memory is a decaying sense. Profeauor
Bain regard» it as a wholly independent faculty of the u»ind ; as
the phenomena thereof cannot f»e included under tlu so of any
other power; or as the Sanskrit w»iters would put it, the c>>gnittun
produced by that faculty cannot he classed under the coguitiou due
to any other * means of knowledge.'
Western psycholoi»»8td lay down Vividness, Atteution and
Repitition a« the conditions facilitating remembrance. Theae three,
are tk« same &s Adaray Praniddäna and Abhyäta of Vätsyägana
(gee above). In relation to the mention of ' »ukha ' and ' duhlch* '
4c. in the NyiyaautrA, we mar note the following fron» Herbert.

554

PRAXpASTAPÄDA. BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI SECTION-(10)

" The things which are beet preserved by the memorj are the t
things which please or terrify, which are great or new (fco., <&c."
"?•
On the question of Remembrance being independent of oar
"will, strongly put for^ari in the Vivaranaprameynsahgi aha, the
follow iug statement of Professor Fleming's helps to ciear the difficulty
" In its first manifestations, merrory operates 8pon aneously, *n&
thoughts are allowed to come and go through the mind without
direction or control. But it comes subsequently to he exercised
with intention and will, some thoughts being sought and invited,
and others being uhunne.l and as far as possible excluded. Sporttaneou* viemory is remembrance, Intentional memory is recollection
reminiscence. Sully calld the former passive and the latter active
memory.
Text (122) In the case of the sages whose nets are in full
accorilavce with the Veda*, we find that froin the
contact of the Soid and the mind, as aided by d
pemc iar virtue, there appears an intuitional
cognition tru* in all its objective details,—with
regcid to objects past, present and future, as also
to Dharma and other {supersensuous) objects,
such as are spoken of in the sc>iptures, as w>ll as
those that are not so mentioned ; and this iniuitional cot/nti.ioii is called ' Arnha' or ' sagic.'
This cognition as a ride fal'Wijs to the Ditine* Sages;
>*nd only iu. rare instantx to human beings
alo; as u-hen. we find a l>(tle fiirl. paying 'my
head tells me that ray hrrthcr will come tomorrow'
Commentary.
The author now proceeds to describe ' snojc' cognition. With
regard to fill objects, sensuous as well as sup^wnsuous, the
8&qr?>x have infallibly true intiut.ion.il cognition*, free from ail
d<»*bt and mistake ; and this is called ( Atrska ' or ' sagic.1
T»«e nnme ' pratibhn.' is given to tbat. form of consciousness
which appears (protiUtd'i) independently of Ne.tisp-organs und

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AN D DISSIMILARITIES.

' 555

inferential indicatives. And the fan* affix in 'prätibkam'
has the reflexive sense; where 'pratibha' is equivalent to
1
pratihhd'
An objection having been raised «as bo there being no cansal
agency that couM give rise to such a cojjnition, and as such its
appearance being impossible, the author adds:—Aided by a
pecvliar virtue. Dkavmavicesha — the peculiar character of
the virtue of the sages ; this peculiar character being cine to
their special learning, austerities and meditation ; and this is
what produces in the sages ao •* intuitional' conseiousot-ss.
This form of consciousness belongs as a rule only to the
Divine Sages dc, &c. The cas^ of the girl saying ' my heart
tells me that my brother will come to-morrow ' cannot be called
one of'Doubtful cognition,' as we'd" not find the two contradictory factors (necessary in ail Doubt); nor can it be called
a case of'mistaken cognition'; as it is found to turn out true.

E.— This * intuitional cognition ' cnnn.-t buk be r<*giirdsd as valid and true.
It has an objective that has area! existence; and being a valid form of cognition
ifc must be regarded as a kind of ' sense-perception,' and not an independent
Prararfna ; it cunnofc be regarded as 'inferential,' a8 it ie not produced by the
cognition of any inferential indicatives; nor is it 'verbal'; nor'analogical/ not being
based upon any form of similarity. Though it is not produced by any of the
external eenae-organs, yat we regard it a« 'sensuou*,' because it is produced directly
by th« Mini, which ia asrau«ha * aenseorgau' m any other organ of perception.
(Page 107, Nyäy.imanjari.)
The word prdtibha h»g been translated a« * intuitional,' this latter word being
taken ia the. sense of 'immediate,' independently of auch ageucie* of cognition
a« the external seuseorgnoa, infer «a rial indicatives, words aud analogy or
iimilarity.
Text (123): Occult perception i* not a distinct form of
Knowledge.. " WhyV Because the perception of
subtle, hidden and remote things, that the perctivers of tltinjs have,—throuyh their exerting of sunk
occult powers as are obtained 6.v the application

£56

PRA<?A3TAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).
of certain unguents to the eyes and to the feet^
and by the, use of the ' sword' the * pill' and the
like, —is purely l sensuous.1
Then as for another kind of cognition that is
regarded as 'occult'—viz., the cognition of the
fruition of past virtues and vicious deed* in the
experiences of the living beings, of the heavens, the
atmosphere and the Earth, a* indicate I by the
movements of plants and asterisms,—thin also is
only inferential.

As for the cognition of virtue &c, independently of
inferential ' indicatives, this ivould be included
either in l sensuous ' of in Arsha' cognition.
Such then is Buddhi. (IX-ii-13).
Commentary.
[Page 259 ] Some people regard 'occult perception' tobe a
distinct form of kuowiedge ; and with a view to setting aside
this view, the author says—'occult perception is not a distinct
form of knowledge*', and this he next proceeds to explain
further. Tuose people are called ' siddha ' (' endowed with occult
powers') who are capable of perceiving such things as have
defiuiite forms and are capable of being perceived and those
perceivers who have obtained their occult powers by means of
unguents &c. have perceptions of such things as are too fine or
subtle for ordinary perceptions, or are hidden from ordinary
vision, or are too remote for ordinary perceptioa ; but this
perception also is dependent upon the fnncMoniug of the senseorgans (aided by the application* <£c.) ; and as such it cannot but
be regarded as purely 'seusuous/
The other kind of cognition put forward is distinctly
inferential, being due to the perception of the planetary movement ucc, which, thus, serve as ' inferential indicatives'.
Then as for the cognition of virtue <&c, independently of
the cognition of any such 'indicatives/ it if either * sensuous

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

557

or drska ; for instance, when the cognition would be brought
about; by the a^enev of the sense-organs it would be ' sensuous
and if independently of such agencies, it would be 4 ämha.'
The author sums up the section. Thus, iu the abov&
manner has Buddhi been described.
Text (124) : Pleasure is of the nature of1 favour' or agretaUeness. When there is proximity of such desirable things as a garland and the like, there being a
comminuting ot that thing, its perception and the
senseoryan capable of taking cognizance of it, the
contact of the soul and the mind, aided by the agency
of Dkarma etc., brings about a feeling which
produces such effects as 'favour', 'affection',
brightness of the eyes etc.; and this feeling U
what is called f sukka' or 'pleasure.*
In regard to past objects, it is produeed by memory ; in
regard to future objects it is brought about by
reflection; and that which is felt by the wise,
independently of all such agencies as the remembrance of the object, desire and reflection, is
due to their knowledge, peacefulness of mind,
contentment, and the peculiar character of their
virtues. {X i-1 to 6, and V-ii-lb).
Commentary.
Page 260] In as much as pleasure is a product of Buddhi, the
author proceeds to describe it after having dealt with Buddhi.
Pleasure is of the nature of favour
Pleasure having
tbe character of something desirable or favourable, when
bringing about the experiencing of its objective, favours
the person aa it were. The author explains this further:
When etc., when such desired thing! as a garland, sweet unguents, the woman one loves and so forth, are within his
reach, there being a commingling of the object, it? preception
*ad the organ percepient of it, thi« gives .rise, through the

558

PRXgASTAPÄDA BHÄ3HYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

help of the agency of viitue etc, to a feeling which is ea led
' pleasure \ Even when fcbe desired object is within our reach,
If our rniii«! is taken up by some other object; (and vve fail to
perceive the fornw), we do not, feet any pleasure; hence we
conclude that a precepti>n or cognition of the object also is a
factor in the cause bringing about pleasure. By letcetera' in
the expression * virtue etc., * are meant such other concomitant
circuinstances as uood health and the like.
'Which produces suck effect* etc/ In this the author
points out the effects of the feeling described. ' Anugruha*,
* Favour ' is the exuerienciig or feeling of pleasure; ' Abhi%hvangay' ' Affection,' is the feeling of attachment or attraction
towards the object; * A'ay*i"äiipra^äla,' is the brightness of
the eyes and face. These indications are the effects of
pleasure. When pleasure appears, it produces an experience of
itself in the mind of the person ; and this is the * favour ' to
the experiencing soul ; and when pleasure is experienced, the face
becomes bright. Pleasure also gives rise to au affection or
attraction to wards the objects affording the pleasure.
In regard to pint objects the pleasure is produced by
memory or remembrance. That is to say, after we have once
derived pleasure from an object, at any subsequent time, whenever we remember that object:, we experience a sort of re-trospecfcive pleasure. And in regard to future objects, pleasure is
produced by the reflection or anticipation—'such and such
an object will be mine. In the case of the 'wise/ that is persons
who have realised the true nature of the self, we find that,
even when there is no object to afford the pleasure, no remembrance of any such object, nor again any reflection of it, a
pleasure is actually felt; and this is due to their knowledge,
the peaceful nature of their minds, their contentment, and
tbe peculiar nature of their virtues. (1) The * knowledge '
here meant is the realisation of the *6lf\ (2) The ' peaceful
nature of their minds 'consists in the fact of their senses being

QCA.LITIBS : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

559

under proper control : (3) coal^atmtfnfc ca »si»ts in their nut
desiring any thing bevoud what may ue absolutely necessary
for the keeping of the body; (4) r.he ' p-!Ou{Ur character of
their virtues' consists in tending towards withdrawing the
mind from the objects of sense. These four are the causes of
the pleasures o£ the ' wise.'
There are some people who hold that ' pleasure ' consists in
the absence of pain ; but this view is not compatible with the
well-known experience of bliss iu a positive form ; nor would it be
possible to explain, in accordance with this view, the two-fold
action of persona with the-two fold motive (a) ' I shall obtain
this pleasurable thingJ and (6) * I shall avoid that which i«
undesirable.'
Text (125) : Pain is of the nature 'harm.' When
there is proximity of such undeaira'de objects as
poison and the like, there b*<nj a commingling
of the object, its perception and the organ percipient of it, the contact of the wtd and the mind,
aided by * adhurma,' bringt about a condition of
the mind which gives rise to the feel in j of' anger,7
idea of' harm' a ad a depression of spirits ; and
this condition of the mind is called ' Pain/ In
regard to past objects, such at snakes, tigers and
thieves, experun -ed on some previous occasion,
ike p'/i.-i is due to rememhrantt; and with
reference to future objects it is produced by
reflection.
Commentary.
' Pain ' being the opposite of * Pleasure,' th« author
proceeds to describe it next: Pain i* of the nature of 'harm *
1
Upaghdta' w that whereby one is harmed (upahanyate)
Page 261] At soon a« pain appears it produces a cognition
•f its objeetire a« something undesirable, and thereby * harms'

560

PRA£ASTAFÄDA BHÄSflYA-CHAP. Tl. SECTION (10).

the soul. The author explains this further. Paid is tht
cause of anger etc. The rege is Co be explained as iu tbo
previous section.
Text (126): Desire, * Icchä ' consist* in the wishing f*r
something not already obtained, either for one's
own sake or far the bah*, of another, ft proceeds
from the contact of mind and soul, through
pleasure (&c, or through remembrance. It is the
source of effort, remembrance, virtue and vice.
Ln#t, Hunger, Affection, Aspiration, Compassion
Aversion, Disposition to impose, Inclination and
so forth areHhe various forms of dtbire. Lust it
desire
; Hunger is desire
for food; Affection is desire for the restated
. experiencing of an object; Aspiration is desire
for bringing about something not near at hand;
Compassion is disinterested desir* for the
removal of other's troubles ; Disinclination is the
desire for renouncing an object, after finding
something wrong in it; Disposition to impose i*
the desire for deceiving others; Inclination i$
unexpressed desire. ' Denire to do,' 'Desire U
take away' and so on are the various desires in
reference to various actions (VI-ii-10 to 14?; I-i-6).
Commentary.
AQ object that a man does not already possess, he WAQU,
either for his own sake, or for the sake of another person ; and
he has the wish in the form—' may this be mine/ or ' may thi«
be his;* and this is what is known as 'desire/ This proceeds
from the contaet «fee, <fcc.
When a ploasure-giviog object is such as is not present
before us, we hare still a desire for it; and the cause of thk

QUALITIES i SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

561

desire lies in the pleasure afibrded by it, which, though not
actually felt at the time, is yet recalled to the nriod ; as has
been declared by the author of the Nyayavarti/ca—* the result
is the motive cause': And when the pleasure-giving object
has passed off, the desire that we have for it is due to our
remembrance of the pleasure afforded by it.
Desire is the cause of effort <fkc.~~When wo desire an
object (the cause of pleasure) we make an effort calculated
to bring It to us; when we desire to remember, we have
remembrance; a man acting towards the fulfilment of the
Jyotisht&ma and such other acts prescribed in the scriptures,
acquires Dharma; and when performing such acts as are
prohibited, he acquires Adharma.
In anticipation of the question.—" We have many such
desires as Lust and the like, wherefore has the author
not mentioned these ? *'—it is added that Lust and the rest are
only the general forms of desire, and are not anything distinct
from it. Tbis is further explained :—Lust is desire for sexual
intercourse ;ke.t the word 'Kama* without any qualifying adjuncts
is used in the sense o f desire fqr sexual intercourse ;' in the
case of all other desires the word ^ Kama' is always accompanied by another qualifying word ; e.g. we find in the sentence
Svargakarno yajeta
«Sometimes we desire to
remove the troubles of other persons, without thinking about
our own interests; and this desire constitutes what is called
* Kärunya \ 'Compassion'
*
The desire that is
not expressed, and is only inferred from certain signs is called
' Bhava/ ' Inclination ' or 'Disposition'
The wish for
going is ' JigamiihaJ and so on with every one of the actions,
we have a distinct desire.
Text (127) :—Aversion (Dvesha) is of the nature of heartburning or irritation. It is the jeeling that
makes one think himself burning * or being iriiU

_,
562
[

.
3
PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CRAP VI. SECTION (10)
|
_
^ |
ated. It proceeds /vom the contact öf the soulandi
the mind, aided either by pain or by remembrance. J
Its effects are Effort, Remembrance, Dharma^k
and Adharma. Anyrr, III ivilI, Resentment, Jealousy, and Indignation ere the forms of Aversion ( VI—ii—10 to 14 ; I—i~6 ).

Commentary.
j
When a pain-giving object has passed off, the aversion I
towards it is born of the remembrance of the pain caused byj
it
The aflfort or determination—'I will kill him —
' *\
proceeds from Aveision. The aversion towards men seeking lo
upset the purpose of the Veda produces dharma; it constitutes a|
virtue in itself. And aversion towards persons seeking to keep up ;
that purpose constitutes a sin. Remembrance also sometimes;
proceeds from Aversion;/, t. a man always remembers tho
person whom he hates.
:
* Krodha! * Anger' is that aversion which produces certain
physical changes in the body and quickly disappears.
'Droha * ' Ill-will 'is not perceptible by any outward signs,
it always leads to a deep-seated inclination vesultiug in harm
which continues for some length of time.
• Manyu' ' Resentment' is the aversion that lies hidden
in the mind» the man not being able to retaliate upon the
person who may have harmed him.
'Akskamä* 'Jeaiousy' is a feeling of aversion against
tfc« presence of good qualities in another person.
c
Atnarshal * Indignation,' is the feeling of aversion arising
from the fact of one's own good points being surpassed by those
of other people.
Page 263 Text (128) :—* Prayatna ' * Efort' is synonymous with *• 8amrambhä ' and ' utsaha \ This
%8 of two hinds: (1) that proceeding from

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

563

mere living, and (2) proceeding from detire
and aversion. The former is that v:hick in the
sleeping man carries on the wpiuard and downward breathings {inhalation and exhalation)
and at the moment of aivakening brings about
the contact of the mind with the various organs
of perception* This effort is the direct result of
the contact of the soul and mivd, aided by Dharma
and A dharma The second kind of effort is the
cause of activities leading to the obtaining of the
desirable and the abandoning of the undesirabl
object; and it also conduces to actions calculated
to keep the body in a state of steady equilibrium;
this effort f>roce-ds from the contact of the sou
and mind, aided by desires and by aversions
(vi-ii-14 ; v-i-i; v ii-14; I-i-6).
Commentary.
Effort &c.t
When the embodied soul, accompained
as he is by the residual effects of his past deeds, comes into
contact or close relationship, with mind, he is said to ' live; * and
there is an effort that is preceded by, proceeds from, this act of
living ; and the actions of outward and inward breathing are the
effects of this effort,—because they are actions. At this time
we ha70 no such other sources of Effort, as Desire and Aversion
hence this Effort giving rise to the said actions must be regarded
to be that which proceeds from the mere act of living. Theo
again Effort due to the mere act of living is not only the cause
of the actions of up and down breathings; in fact at the
moment of awakening,—when the man is just waking up—it also
serves the purpose of bringing about the contact of the mind
with the other organs of perception. This fact is proved by.
the following arguments:—The contact of the mind with the
organs of perception (which is inferred from the appearance of
the sensuous perception of objects) must be regarded as brought

564

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10)

about by «ach an action of the mind as is produced by some
Effort,—becauseid is a contact of the mind with the organ of
perception,—like a similar contact during the waking state.
This Effort proceeding from the act of living proceedtl
directly from the conract of the soul and the miod, aided by J
Dhanma and Adharrma; that is to say,' life ' is only the contact!
of the soul with the mind brought about by reason of the |
virtuous and vicious deeds of the soul in his previous life ; and \
it is chiefly from this that tbe Effort in question proceeds.
|
The other kind of Effort proceeds from Desires and Aver-1
sions; and it gives rise to activities calculated to obtain the '
desirable and avoid the undesirable object; and also to those
tending towards the steadiness of the body ; that is to say, that 1
the body being heavy does not fall off is due to an effort on onr ?
part, due to desire ; and snch efforts thus follow from the cor» tact,
of tbe soul and the mind aided by desire and aversion,—fche i
effort tending towards the obtaining of the pleasure giving
object being due to desire, and that tending to the avoiding of
the painful objects to aversion.
Text (129): Gravity resides in Water & Earth, and is
the cause of the action of falling ; it is imper*
ceptible ; it is inferable from the action of falling;
and it is neutralised by Conjunction^ Effort
and Faculty. The Eternality and Evanescence of
this are in the same manner as those of the
colour of the atoms of Water and other Substances.
(V-i-7fc>18; V-ii-3).
Commentary*
Pagd 264. Gravity is &c This sentence points out
the substratum of Gravity. Its effect consists in the form of
the falling of substances. That it is imperceptible is its
peculiar characterestic; it is a quality that ia not perceived
by any of the senseorgans.

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

565

Some people hold that Gravity is perceptible hy the organ
ot touch. B'-t if it were so, then we could perceive the Gravity
of an object upon which we would be sitting, exactly in the
same way that we perceive its warmth or coolness to the
touch ; specially as in the perception of its objective, the organ
of touch does not st'and in need of any other condition save
its own proximity or contact. As for the fact of our cognising
the gravity of objects upon our head or on our hands, that
cognition is due to the quality being inferred from the lowering
down of our hand &c. (caused by the weight poo upon it.)
Hence in anticipation of the question—"if the quality is supersensuous how is it cognised?'1 —the author has added—'it is inferable from the action of falling: ' That is to say, according
to us Gravity is only that material canse of falling which
subsists, with this falling, in the composite object that falls.
This sets aside the following declaration made by others:
"Gravity does not reside in the composite object (but in the
component parts), as in the object we do not perceive any
lowering down which is the peculiar effect of Gravity ;" as if
it were so, then .there would be no falling of composit
objects:
It might be argued that " the falling is due to the Gravity
of the component parts"; but then the Gravity and the consequent falling of these parts also will have to be regarded as
being due to the Gravity of their constituent parts; and so on
and on we would come to have Gravity in the component atoms
alone; and thus there would be no Gravity in any products
at all 1
Objection: " We assume the existence of Gravity in the
component parts themselves, because the falling of these could
out be due to the gravity of the constituents of these parts ; as
any such gravity would not be co-existent with the action of
falling (the gravity astding in the parts, and the falling in the
parts made up of these parts).1'

566

,

PIVA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION «o)

|

. ,
ä
Reply: Exactly the same reasoning would lead us to <
assume the exi&tence of Gravity in the composite abject itself. 1
As for the fact of our not perceiving any effect of the
Gravity of the composite object, apart from that produced by j
that of its component part?,—this is due to the dif-1
ference between the Gravity of the objects and that j
of its parts taken together being infinitesimal. As for
instance, when a large object is raised, we do not perceive any j
effects of the Gravity of the smaller objects that may be lying •
on the larger object.
Gravity 18 neutralised by conjunction, effort and faculty \
(in theJbrm of speed); as when obstructed by these it does not |
bring about its pfTect. For instance, there is tio falling of the
man in the paiki, because of hii- contact with this latter objtct;
the body of man does not fall, because Gravity is counteracted
by the effort of the man to keep standing ; the arrow shot out
does not drop down, as its Gravity is neutralised by the speed
or momentum imparted to it.
The etemality <&c.-^Thac is to say, just as the colour etc.
of the atom of Water are eternal, so is the Gravity of the atom
of Earth and Water eternal ; and as the colour etc., of the
aqueous products are evanescent, being produced by the colour
etc., of the component molecules, and being destroyed by the
destruction of their substrates,—so also is the Gravity of products (evanescent, being produced by the Gravity of the component molecules, and destroyed by the destruction of jits sub*tractes).
:

Text (130) :—Fluidity is the cause of th& action of
* flowing: ( V—i— 4 )
It resides in thrte substances. It is of two hinds:
Natural or Intrinsic and Incidental or Eatrinsie*. Intrinsic Fluidity is the specific property of
Water; and extrinsic fluidity belongs in common

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

567

to Earth and Light. The vteryiulity aud evanesence of intrinsic fluidity would be like those of
Gravity. { II—i—2, 6, 7).
Objection—: " In as much äs ive find Waier in the
form of solids,, we cannot regard fluid>ty
to be its? intrinsic property "
Reply :—Not so ; because what happens in the case of
solidified water in the form of snow and
hail, is that fluidity is absent, On account of the
üuidity of the aqueous atoms comp sing them
Having been counteracted by the mutual combination of these atoms which are in contact
with the subtle supernatural fire ~-thi& com*
bination being productive of the substance and
thus being named * solid.*
The extrinsic fluidity of Earth and Light is produced by contact with fire. For instance, in
the case of such things as
butter, and
the I ke, what happens is that their component
atoms, coming in contact with fire, and acquiring
o certain amount of speed favouring the operation
of this* contact, there arises in them a certain
action; and this action bringing about the
disjunction (or disruption) of the atoms, the
cohesive conjunction of the substance is destroyed;
and the gross object having thus disappeared,
there appears, in the atoms thus disjoined, a
fluidity, produced by heat generated by the contact of fire. Then again, through the force of
the desti ies of persons concerned, the atoms
combining again, this combination gives rise to
a certain action, which produces certain combinations, bringing about such aggregate products as the Diad and the rett. In these pro-

51*8
.

;

PRAgASTAPÄDA B BÄSH Y A—CHAP. VI,. SECTION (10)
|
.
.
_______
__
,*
du-cta, simultaneously with the production of 1
colour and' other qualities, there appears the >\
qu&lity of fluidity, following from the fluidity 1
of the component atoms.
Commentary^

|

That property which gives rise to the action of flowing ]
is Fluidity. It resides in three substances—Earth, Water and ;
Fire. It is of two kinds, while Gravity is of one kind only, \
Fluidity is of two kinds—it is this difference that is iudicated j
hy the particle 'tu.' The two kiods of Fluidity »re (1) the
Natural or Intrinsice and (2) the Incidental or Extrinsic. The ?-j
Word x naimittika* means that which is due to some nhnitta
or cause, which iu the case ia question, ia contact with fire;
where as the ' sämsiddhilca* is that which belongs to the thing
by its very nature, and ia not produced by Such extraneous
agencies as contact with fire.
Intrinsic Fluidity is the specific property of Water ; as it
does uot reside in any other substance ; while extrinsic Fluid
pity is a property common also to Earth and to Light.
The eternality and non-eternal ity of intrinsic fluidity would
be like the eteruality and non^eternality of Gravity. That is
to say, just as Gravity inhering in eternal substances is eternal,
and that inhering in evanescent substances evanescent, being
as it is, due to a like property in the component cause of those
substances, and being destroyed by the destruction of those
substances,—so exactly is the case with intrinsic Fluidity.
Objection: '* In as much as we fiud Water in such solid
forms as the snow, hail and the rest, we can never believe that
FluiJity ia the intrinsic quality of Water."
Reply : As a matter of fact, we find Water everywhere
in the liquid state ; and thence we become certain of the fact
of Fluidity being the intrinsic quality of Water; then, as for
such apparently solid aqueous substances as snow and hail,

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

569

where Fluidity is found to be wanting,^— the fact is that the.
Fluidity of the atoms composing these substances is counteracted
by the cohesive conjunction of the aqueous atoms due to the
contact of heat; this fact of the fluidity of atoms being counteracted by the contact of heat we infer from such well-recognised
facts as the destruction of the liquid form of salt-water by
haat; and the fact of salt being aqueous is inferred from the
fft.cn of its melting in due course of time into water, just like
snow and hail; the melting of snow and bail must be
regarded to be due to the beat of the Earth; as the melting
of all solid substances is found to be due to the contact of beat;
as we find in the case of gold for instance ; and the liquifaction
of snow and hail is also a kind of melting; hence as a
cause of this also we accept the contact of heat, the melting
power of which we have seen in more thai* one instance.
Having described intrinsic Fluidity, the author proceeds
to describe extrinsic Fluidity. The extrinsic fluidity residing
in Earth and Light is produced by contact with Are. The
ignorant enquirer having put the question—' how is it produced V—the author says:—For instance, in the case of ouch
»distances as butter etc.t etc. When the component atoms of such
earthy substances as butter, lac and wax come into contact
with fire, there appears in them a certain action ; this action
brings about a disjunction of the atoms, and thereby their
cohesive combination being destroyed, the original substance
of the butter etc., ceases to exist; and the atoms being let
loose, their contact with fire produces in them the property
of Fluidity ; and then these atoms, now endowed wdtih Fluidity,
coming into contact with certain embodied souls, the peculiar
destiny of these souls produces in the Atoms a certain
action; and this action bringing about a combination of
the fluid atoms, we have the products io the order of tbe
Diad, the Triad and so forth ; and simultaneously with the production, of the properties of colour etc., ire have in them the
32

570

PBAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. YV SECTION (10)

quality of Fluidity also, proceeding from the Fluidity of the
component atoms.
This same reasoning applies to the melting of such substances as snow, hail and the like.
Text (131) :—Viscidity is the specific quality of water;
it is the cause of cohesion and smoothness. The
rternality and evanescence of this also would be
in the same manner as those of Gravity.
(JI—i—2).
Commentary.
By' eoheeioo ' is meant that property wheredy flour and
such other things are turned into the form,of a lump and
* smoothness ' is the clearness of the skin of the hody, following
from a good wash and vubbicg; the * etc.,' is added with a view
to include ' softness' and such other qualities as are due to
Yiseidity.
Viscidity, like Gravity, in the atoms is eternal, and in the
products it is produced from a like quality in the component
atoms, and is destroyed by the destruction of the object in
which it resides.
. Text (132): Faculty %s of three kinds: (1) 'Speed or
momentum (2) Mental impression and (3) Elasticity.
(1) Of thesef npeed is produced in the Ave corporeal
substances, by an action or motion through some
cause; it is the*cause of a series of motions in a
definite direction; it is counteracted by the conjunction of tangible (solid) substances; and in
some cases, it is preceded by a like quality in the
component parts of the substance.

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

571

(2) The faculty called * menial impression' is a property
of the Self; it ie the cause of the remembrance an4
recognition of things previously seen or heard, or
experienced; and is counteracted by contrary
cognition, intoxication and extremes of pain <fee,
It is propuced by (a) forcible cognitions, (b) by
repeated cognitions and (c) by impressive crgnitions produced by special efforts,
(a) The contact of mind and soul under the influence of a
forcible cognition, brings about a peculiarly forcible faculty or impression with reference to an
object of wonder to the observer; as for instance
when a man from the south happens to see a cameL
(b) When study, arts, physical exercises and such other
things are repeatedly practised, then in regard to
them the mind—soul contact aided bythe impression produced by one repitition brings about the
next repiiiiion ; and so en ond en, a peculiarly
forcible faculty or impression is produced,
(c) The rrAvd being uith, special efforts, applied to
the visual organ, with a view to see an interest'
ing object never seen le/ore,—there appears a
perception which is as impressive as the perception of the flash of lightning; and the mindsoul contact under the influence of this impres*
sive cognition, gives rise to a peculiar faculty ;
as for instance, when one happens to see silver
and golden lotuses in the (Celestial Lake).
(l)

Elasticity, on the other hand, resides in such
substances as have their component molecules
solidly packed together ; and [when at a certain
point of time] • the object in which it resides
* The word effT5U?fttTQfBTfQ3 appear* to be misplaced ; a» it doe* not qu
it in with the rat of the untenct. The Kandali doe» not make any mention

572

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA .BHÄaHYA—CHAP VI. SECTION (10)
happens to have its position changed^ it tends
to bring it bach to its original position. Effects
of Elasticity are seen in such objects as a bow,
the branches of trues, horns, teeth, threads, cloth
and the like,-*-aLl of which are products from
certain animale[and inanimate objects—whom
we. Und to contract and expand.
The eternality and evanescence of this (Faculty or'
Elasticity) are liKt those of Gravity.

Commentry.
Faculty, sämskära is of three kinds,; in the forms of (1)
8jt>eed, (2) inentai impression and (3) elasticity. Of these, Speed
is produced by action or motion in the five corporeal substances,
Earth, Water, Light, Air and Mind; and in no other substance.
Action or motion cannot bs regarded as producing Speed by
itself, as we do not find any speed proceeding from slow motion ;
hence it is only when the Action or Motion is aided by such
accessory causes as pushing, striking and the like, that it gives
rise to Speed. It is the series of actions in a definite
direction; that is to say, it always gives rise to a series of
actions or motions towards that direction in which the Speed
is produced. Speed is destroyed by the peculiar contact of a
tangible or solid object, the contact being with the extremely
solid particles of that object; this peculiar solidarity of the
particles is necessary in this object only when the Speed also
ia particularly forcible ; as for slow speed, it is destroyed by the
contact of any solid object. As for instance, in the case of
the arrow that has been shot, as long as it retains the great
momentum imparted to it, it can be obstructed only by coming
into contact with a sufficiently solid and hard object; while when
it has slowed down and lost its momentum its career is stopped
even by the calm air of the atmosphere.
As a rule Speed is produced by motion ia the object itself;

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

573

bat in some cases, as in the case of a mas» of water composed
of water molecules endowed with a certain momentum, we find
it to b* produced by the momentum of the component
particles.
(2). The Faculty known as ' mental impression/ Bhva7tää(
is a property of the Self. Its effects are described as the remembrance and recognition of things that have been seen,
heard or otherwise known on a previous occasion. Under ' otherwise known' we must include even mistaken cognitions ; as we
und that w« have remembiances of even such objects as may
have been wrongly perceived.
This Faculty is destroyed or counteracted—(1) by contrary
cognitions, as when what we have learnt we forget when our
mind is under the influence of such excitements as those of
gambling and the like;—(2) by intotication, as a drunken man
loses all memory;—(3) by such extremes of pain &c, as are
caused by death for instance ; it is the extreme pain suffered in
the womb and in the birth process that makes us lose the
memory our pagt lives. Extremes of pleasure also are found to
deprive us of our memory ; as also do. extreme anger &c.
Mental Impression is produced—(1) by forcible cognitions, (2) by repeated cognitions and (3) by impressive cognitions. (1) We find a forcible mental impression produced when
the mind-soul contact is influenced by the forcible cognition of an object that excites the wonder of the observer; E. G;
the man of the south having never seen a camel, it is for him a
wonderful object; hence when he happens to see it, his cognition
of it is so forcible as to leave on his mind a lasting impression;
and it makes him vividly remember it in His after life. (2) In
regard to such things as' study '-»learning of the scriptures
etc.;' arts'—the painting of pictures etc. ; and ' physical exercise '—the exercises with weapons etc.;—we find that when
they are regularly practised, with reference to one and the
same object, the impression is made on the mind over and over

574

PRAQASTAPÄDA BBTÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10)

again for a long f.irfte ; and thus the memory due to this is
extremely vivid; this memory cannot he regarded as produced
by only the first of the series of cognitions ; as we find thai A
simple cognition leaves no lasting impression and we have no
memory of the object; nor can ifc be attributed to only the last
coguitioD of the series, as if this alone were able to produce the
vivid memory, then there would be no use for the repeated
exercises; hence we conclude that memory is produced by
the last cognition aided by the last but one impression, which
in its tura is aided by the impression left by the previona
cognition, and so on backwards, the whole series being aided by
the impression made by the first cognition.
In this connection we consider the following question:
when a certain scientific work is being studied, are the facts
signified directly by the Words, or by sphota ?
Question. " Why should there be any such doubt/'
Answer. For the simple reason that there is a difference
of opinion on the point: some peopie hold that what expresses
the meaning is, not the word, but the spkota; while others bold
that meanings are expressed by the sentences (and words)
themselves; and amid all this diversity of opinion, it is only
natural that the enquirer should have his doubts. On this
question then we have the following
PURVAPAKSHA.
'••What expresses the meaning is the sphota. If the word
" had no existence apart from the component lptters, and the
"sentence no existence apart from the words composing it, then
'*th*re could be no comprehension of the meaning at all. That
" is to say, as a matter of fact we find that no single letter
"brings about any cognition of the meaning; as if it did,
" there would be nothing to be done by the remaining
"letters; and as for a collective aggregate of all the letters

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

575

" composing a word, DO such aggregation is possible; as at the
" time that we hear the last letter of the word, the previous
" letters have ceased to exist/1
Page 269r—" It might be argued that all letters being
" eternal, an aggregation of these would^ be quite possible.
« Even if we admit this existence of the letters, yet our cognition
" of-these can not be everlasting ; and hence at the time of our
" cognition of the last letter» the cognition of the preceding
"letters will have ceased to exist; and if an uncognised letter
" were to express any meaning, then all meanings would be
" always comprehended; as in reality as regards the matter
" under consideration, there would be no difference between that
" which is not cognised after having been once cognised and
" that which is not cognised at all.
" It may be urged that the letters previously cognised
*• become fixed in the memory, and this becomes the means of
" these being remembered at the time of the cognition of the
" last letter. But then, as for the remembrance of the letters, if
" this too is only gradual, the letters being remembered one
" after the other, then too any aggregation of these would not
" be possible; as at the time that we could cognise or hear the
** third letter, the remembrance of the first letter will have
" ceased to exist; and there is no possibility of the remem*' brances of all appearing simultaneously ; as the simultaneity
" of cognitions has been shown to be impossible.
" The opponent may put forward the following view:
•' What happens is this—(1) First of all we hear or cognise the
" first letter; (2) then we have an impression of the same;
4<
(3) then we cognise the second letter; (4») this is followed by
" the impression left by this coguition ; (5) then we hear
" the third letter, and (6) this brings about an impression of
"itself but qualified by, and containing within itself, the
" impression of the preceding letters; and thus we find that
" what we have in the end is a combined impression of all the

576

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

- i
^1

" letters composing the word ; and this impression brings about
"a simuitaoious remembrance of these letters as one composite
" whole.'
4

*If you admit this view of the case, fch*n th« orderly
"sequence ceases; as the sequence consists in one letter comiug
" after the other; and this sequence could be with regard either
" to time or to space; and neither of these would have any place
" as regards letters ; as each letter is omnipresent and eternal
" (and there could be no sequence of time or place with regard
" to such an object; as * sequence' implies that one ceases to
41
exist when the other appears). The only sequence that would
" be possible in the case of words would be the one based
" upon the cognitions thai we have of them; and if all the
"letters were to appear in a single remembrance, then even this
* cognitive sequence would not be possible ; and thus express" iveness would have to be attributed to letters devoid of all
*' sequence; and there would be no difference in the
"coguition of the meanings of the words ' sara * and ' ra«a',
" ' vana' and * nava \ ' nadi * and * dina '; as each pair contains
" exactly the same letters (though in different orders); and
"sequence has no bearing on the cognition of meanings!! As
" a matter of fact however, we do cognise a difference in the
" meanings of words containing the same letters in different!
"orders of sequence; and as this would not be otherwise ex" plicable, this Apparent Inconsistency proves the existence
'* of some other agency in the cognition of word-meanings, than
" the letters composing the words; and it is this agency to
" which we give the name of * sphota \
" Objection.—* The sphota also, unless it is itself manifested,
" cannot express any meaning; as otherwise every meaning
u
vwoold be cognised at all times. And as for the manifestation
11
of this sphota, it could not be done by the letters; «s in
"accordance with the reasoning brought forward by yourself,
" it could not be done by the letters either singly or col*

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

577

" lectively; and thus the expression of meanings by sphota
" becomes as impossible as that of letters or words'.
" To this objection, the following reply is made :—Each of
"the sounds prodnced in the air by the efforts of the speaker gives
" rise to an indistinct spkota corresponding to each individual
" letter; and having, in the first instance, acquired a corres" poodence to the object sought to be expressed by the word,
" they subsequently bring about the manifestation of the sphota
" in its distinct form. And it is thus that at the close of the
" utterance of the word, we have the distinct cognition of the
" expressed object as on% composite whole, altogether free from
" any notions of sequence in the order of the letters composing
"the word.
" If the word were nothing apart from the letters cora" posing it, then, in as much as a number of letters could never
" be included in any single cognition, there would be no idea
" of the word as a single whole; and thus the idea of the word
" would be without any real substratum ; and the assertion ' we
"cogois* the meaning by means of the word J would become
" meaningless.
11

For these reasons we conclude that apart from the letters
" composing the word, there is some single entity which makes
" the meaning clear, (sphuta' (and this is what we call the
" < vphota.')
In reply to the above, *e have the following.—
SIDDHÄNTA.
In such sentences as ' Gunaratndbharanah kdyastha«
kulatilakah pändudäsah' f Päodudäsa, the best of Kay as t has
is endowed with excellent qualities'), we do perceive the lettersone after the other; but in the end we have no idea of anything
apart ftora the letters we have heard. It could be so ouly if
the word were in the first instance cognised as consisting of
33

5/8

PBA(?ASTAPÄDA> BHÄSHYA—CflAP. VI. SECTJQN (10.)

, and then subsequently in its true character, which -was"?
something different from the letters, and hence this latter 1
cognition falsified the former; as we have in the case of the shell |
and the silver, (where the shell is at first cognised as silver arid f
then subsequently as the "shell, and bence sve accept the latter
to be true and the former to be false). la the case in question ;
we have no such idea as that * this word is not one made up |
of letters, but it is in the form of sphota* As for the idea j*
that we have of the word aa a single whole, that too does not 1
point to any distinct object (apart from the component letters); 'A
in fact it points only to those same letters taken collectively ; \
exactly as we have the idea of ' forest' pointing to the treeg
contained in it collectively, so also the assertion * we comprehend i
the meaning form the word' refers to the aggregate of the :
jetters taken collectively.
j
And as we do not directly perceive any such thing as sphota, •
it could not be cognised by any of the other means of knowledge;
as none of these would have any means of applying to such a
thing.
Objection—" The apparent inconsistency of the cognition
of meaning, which could not be otherwise explained, would be {
the means pointing to such a thing."
Reply : The spkota which you hold to be the means of
the cognition of the meaning,—is this spkota itself known or
not known ? If an unknown thing were to bring about the
cognition, then we would have the cognition at all tim^s. And
as for its being known, we have already shown that there can be
no cognition of it. As a matter of fact* we find the cognition of
the meaning to have the relation of invariable concomitance with
the component letters themselves; and hence it is far more
reasonable to formulate a certain means whereby these letters
themselves would, through their expressive power, denote the
meaning,—than to assume a thing that has absolutely no existence, being exactly like the ' sky-flower.'

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

579

Nor would it he right to argue that,—" if the letters were
expressive of the meaning, then it would be possible for us to
comprehend the meaning of the word, even when the order of
the letters would be changed, or when the letters would be
pronounced with long intervals of time between them/* Because
the letters cannot be regarded as the means of the comprehension of meaning, when their order is changed, or when they are
pronounced by different persons, or when they are separated
from one another in time or space. iLs the potentialities of
things have to be inferred from the effects they produce ; that is
to say, when we find certain effects to be produced by a thing,
we infer the existence in this latter of a potency or power capable of bringing about that effect; this has been thus declared by
great writers.—' As many lettere, endowed with as many qualification, as are found to be capable of expressing a certain
meaning,—so many and such letters alone can be regarded
as expressive of that meaning.' (^lohavartika—chapter on
< sphota,y verse 69).
Then again, for the simple reason that letters are not
omnipresent and not eternal (according to the Naiyayika),
there is sequence among them; and it is this difference in tie
sequential order of letters that makes the meaning of the word
' dina' different from that of the word * nadl \ Nor would it
be right to argue that—u no sequential order belonging to the
words, no such order could be regarded as having an effect on
the signification of words"; as we find the letters actually to be
liable to production, and to have limited existence in space;
and as such it is only natural that they should be xaffected by
sequence both of time and space.
It has been argued above th<*t the expiessive power cannot
belong to the letters either individually or collectively. But
this assertion was made without understanding the position of
the other party. Though it is true that letters have no permanent existence, yet the impressions of all the letters composing

580

PRAQASTAPÄDA BftÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

a word combining together do actually bring about the
cognition of the meaning of the word ; or the meaning may be
regarded as expressed by the last letter of the word, as aided,
either by the impressions or by the actual remembrance of the
preceding letters. As to how many impressions combine to
bring about a single idea,—this we have shown while dealing
with Duality.
Objection: " It is not right to hold the comprehension of
the meaning to arise from the impressions of the letters
composing the word; as an impression can bring about the
remembrance of only that thing the cognition whereof gave it
birth, and not of anything else; as has been declared by Mandana
Mi^ra in his Sphotasiddhi :—
Page 271] Impressions grre)ise to the ideas of only those
things by the character whereof they are themselves impressed;
and hence it is not right to accept the idea of any other thing
to be brought about by them."
Reply: This argument also is not quite sound ; as the
impression of each letter produced by its cognition is such as
is endowed with the faculty of bringing about the comprehension of the meaning of the word (composed of those letters),
—this faculty having potencies different in nature from those
that serve to bring about the remembrance of things. That
it is so we infer from the nature of the effects produced. But
even granting that the impressions in question are of the same
nature as the bhdvands (that produce remembrance),—it is
quite possible for them to bring about the comprehension of
word-meanings; that they bring about this comprehension can
be inferred from the fact of the comprehension appearing only
when we have th« impressions. The person who would postulate
the sphota will find it necessary to assume certain potentaiities
in this aphoto, tending to bring about the comprehension of
the word-meaning; and as such it would be necessary to make
more assumptions in this case; whereas in our case the Impres-

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

581

sion is admitted by both parties, and i& is necessary for us only
to assume the peculiar faculty in them spoken of above; and
this would certainly be a much simpler matter. To this same
effect we have the following declaration of the learned.—
" Though an Impression baa certainly the faculty of bringing
about remembrances, yet that fact doc not preclude it from
having a faculty tending to produce other effects' (QlokaFar$i&a—-Chap, on c Sphota' verse 102.)
Thus then we conclude that the comprehension of the
word-meaning being quite explicable through the agency of the
impressions, there can be no ground for the assuming of Sphota,
The author now proceeds to describe the Faculty produced
by impressive cognitions. When a man puts forth special
efforts to perceive an object never seen before, the cognition
that he has is as impressive as the perception of the lightningflash ; and it is such a cognition that is meant by the expression
ädarapratyaya';. and when the mind-soul contact is aided
by such a cognition, there appears a peculiarly forcible faculty;
this character being indicated by the fact of its sot disappearing even after the lapse of a long time.
Example: 'On the full moon day of the month of Caitra,—
when the moon is in the asterism of Citrä,—at midnight are
seen silver and golden lotuses in the Devahrada'—having
heard this many people congregate on that day on the banks
of the lake, with a view to witness the phenomenon; and when
the middle of night is about to arrive, they fix their eyes and
their minds intently ou the lake; and Uhe lotuses actually
appear; even though they are seen but for a moment, the sight
is so impressive that the impression left on the mind is very
strong; and tends to the scene being remembered very distinctly
ever afterwards.
(3) Our author next describes the faculty in the form of

582

PRACASTAPÄDA. BHÄSaYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

Elasticity: The particle 'tu* serves to distinguish tbe faculty
known aa ' Meutal Impression '—which resides in non-tangible
substances—from Elasticity which subsists in taogible substances,
me quaaij Gi mäaviuivj, tooiumg *«* auvu tangible substances
as have their component molecules solidly • packed together,
tends to bring back its substratum to its own final straight
positiou after it has swerved from that position.
There are some people who deny the existence of Elasticity
on the ground of its not beiog perceptible by the sense-organs;
and for the sake of these persons, the author proceeds to show
certain effects that cannot be due to any other cause save
Elasticity: In certain things we find that they are- often conrtracted, and then they expand again to their original position :
and this could bö due to nothing else save the existence in these
Greets, of the quality of elasticity. For instance, ia the case of
such objects as the bow, the branch of a tree and the like, we
find tbafr when they are bent and let go again, they revert to
their original position; and the immaterial cause of this
reversion lies in a certain faculty that inheres in the objects
along with the action that caused the bending; and to thisfaculty we -give the name of * elasticity ;' and no other cause?
is possible»
Some people regard the expression ' bkugnasanvartiteahu *
as qualifying * stü^avasträdishu;' and explain it as 'the
contracted threads &c, that are expanded &c, &c*
Just as Gravity is eternal in the atom, and evanescent in
the products, so is Elasticity also.
s.—-There is no reason why our commentator should have introduced
the discussion of Sphota in the present section. It would be in its proper place
under the chapter dealing with words and their meanings.
To the objection brought forward on the strength of Mandana Sli^ra's Kari&a
our coijQteutator hag missed a strong point, in that he has uot based his reply on
the argument that the tact of the impression bringing about the remembrance of
the letters having been admitted by the opponent, the remembrance of the letters
could bring about the comprehension of the meaning also; and this would obviate
the necessity of assuming a sphota'

BHÄ8HYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

583

Text (133).—Dhatma is the property of Man; it brings
about to the agent happiness, means of happiness
and final deliverance; it is supersensuons ; it is
destr uctible by the experiencing of the last item of happiness;
it (a) is produced by the contact of the Man tolth the internal
organ, by means of pure thoughts and determinations ; and with regard to the different cast's and
conditions of men there are distinct means of
accomplishing it. (I—i—2 ; VI—ii—1; VI—i—
5; J—a«—8.
The means of Dharma consists vn various substances,
qualities and actions, laid down, in the Veda
and the Latv-Books,—same as belonging in
common to all men, and some as pertaining
specially to distinct castes and condiions. Among
the common ones we have the following : Faith
in Dharma, Harmlessness, Benevolence, Truthfulness, Freedom from desire for undue Possesston,
Freedom from lust, Purity of Intentions, Absence
of anger, Bathing, use of purifying substances,
Devotion to Deity, Fading, and Non-neglect
(of duties). (VI—H--2, 5, 8, 9, 3, 4;.

The Dharma common to the Brahmana, the Kshattriya
and the Vaishya, consists in the following:—
Performing of sacrifices, study, charities; and
the specific Dharma of the Brahmana consists in—
the receiving of gifts, Teaching, officiating at sacrifices and the due performance of the rites and
ceremonies laid down for the Brahmana. Of
the Kshattriya, the specific Dharma consists in—
Proper care of the people under him, Punishing
of Criminals, not fleeing from battle, and the due
(a) The Com. breaks this eompound into separate parts m
fa^\5T?VniFfej3J J but it appears better to combine the two as hat been
translation.

584*

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.
performance of the rites and ceremonies 'prescribed
for the caste. For the Vaifhya, buying and selling,
agriculture, Tending of cattle, and the due performance of the rites laid down for the Vaishya.
For the Shudra,—submission to the other castes
and the performance of rites and ceremonies
without auy mantras.
The specific Dharma of the various states of a man's
life is as follows:—For the ' student,' living at
the house of his teacher, attendance upon the teacher and the Fire, Fetching of fuel, living on alms,
in the manner prescribed in the scriptures, the
avoidance of such things as wine, meat, sleepivg
during day, painting of the eye, the use of
unguents and so forth. For the student who%
having finished his studies and closed the rtligkxms
life of the btudent with thefiual' bath \ has taken
a wife to himself and settled as a householdet,—
(A) the morning and evening offering of the five
'great sacrifices',—calUd (1) the 'Bhutayafna
{sacrifice to animals), (2) the ' Manushya yajna
{sacrifice to men)% (3) * Deoayajna * (sacrifice to
divine beings), (4) ' Pitriyajna* (sacrifice to the
Fathers), and (5) * Brahmayajna* (sacrifice to the
Brahma or Veda),—by means of wealth acquired
by such methods^) as the * Qälina' and the * Yäyävara'; (B) the taking of the Kkdgni Fire and
the offering into it of the absolutely necessary
1
Pakayajna' sacrifices, and also, if possible, of
such sacrifices as those of the * Agnyddheya \
the * Haviryajna \ the * Agnishtoma* and the

(a) Foot Note .-—TA accepting of only so much of the gift OB would ill
certain vessel calculated to contain enough for a fixed number of d
constitutes the 'Qrtina, * method of livelihood ; and the bogging of alm
house to house forms the ' Yäy&vara * method of livelihood.

PRAgASTAPÄOA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SßcmOff (10.)

585

f

Sornayajna'; (G) and begetting of chüdrtn,
and the avoiding of intercourse at othti* times
For the'Student* as well as the 'householder'
it is laid down that when he goes away from the
village inhabited by him, and betakes himself
to the life of the ' Vänaprastha' (Recluse), he
lives in the Jorest, wears only skins and bark of
trees, never shaves his hair 0* beata\ and nevet
fares his nails, lives only upon wild things,
and those also only such as are left after th*
sacrifices have been pet formed and the guests duly
fed. A man having passed through all these three
states, or one being m any one 0/ the states, being
moved by the proper amount of faith, takes the
vom of universal benevolence and takes to thehfeof
wandering; he should then renounce the specific
duties of his previous state, and white not neglecting
the internal and external duties of * Yama * and
* Niyama', he should acquire the true knowledge of
the six Categories and thereby try to accomplish
* Yoga* {Union'with the Supreme).
the contact of the mind and soul, when aided by all
the accessories detailed above, followed without a
desire for gaining thereby any visible results
and by the utmost purity of motives, tends to
bring about * Dharrna \
Commentry.
What ia knowu as l Dharma' or * Merit' is a property
belonging to Man ; and it ia uot a potency residing ia the action
performed.
Dharma ia the direct cause of happiness, of the means of
happiness and also of final Deliverance,—this last consisting in
the absolute destruction of all fresh specific qualities of the Self.
*e 5 —Wo.

Vol. X X X V .

586

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

This sentence is to be taken as a definition of ' Dharma':—* That
which, for the performer, is the cause onlj of happiness
is dharma/ and not that' Dharma ia that which bring«
happiness to the performer only' ; because we fiad it laid down
ia the scriptures that the satisfaction, which is the effect; of such
Dharma as the performance of the Sräddha, accrues to the Father,
while the actual performer is the Son; and so also when a man
desiring rain performs the Kärlri sacriice (which is laid down as
the sacrifice bringing about zttin), its effect, in the form of rain,
causes happiness, uofc to him alone, but to all the other men thai
may be living in tba placav
Objection:—" Such Vedic declarafiiona as—'one desiring
heaven should perform sacrifices ', which means that' he should
accomplish heaven for himself by means of the sacrifice '—teod
to show that actions are the means of accomplishing desirable
ends; and that which unites a man with something gaud and
desirable is Dharma. Consequently it is- the action, of
sacrifice for instance, which is Dharraa j and benee Dharma
cannot be regarded as a property of the Self;: and a peison
who performs such actions is ceiled ' Dljannika* ('righteous ')<*
Reply:—This is not right; because the action baviug
but a momentary existence, could not be the direct cause of the
result which appears at some other time.
Page 274.J Objection :—" It is true that Action, of
sacrifice f. i,t has a momentary existence; and the result in
the shape of heaven appears at some other time ; and uo effect
could be produced from the cause that has bee» destroyed ;
and yet we find the Veda declaring that sucb actions as
sacrifice and the like are tb« causes of results appearing at other
times. This Apparent Inconsistency can be reconciled only by
postulating that in the action there ia a certain potency
continuing to exist for a long time, and capable of bringing
about the result. This theory keeps intact the fact of Actions
leading to results, as declared in the Veda. And as this

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTIONO (t).

587

* potency ' is not amenable to any other means of knowledge,
it has been called ' Apürva ' (Lit. * not previously extant',
1
Something new '). This has been thus declared in the
following Kävikä.—1 The momentary action being laid down
as bringing about a certain result appearing after a long
time, this would not be possible except by the assumption oi
the Apürva ' (Tantravärtika—TQXb p. 360, II-i-5)."
Reply :—This is not right ; as the said potency could not
inhere in the action itself, which hag only a momentary existence;
because when the substratum is not there, the potency can not
remain without a substratum. As for the result, in the form of
heaven for instance, it does not exist ab the time that the action
is destroyed; and hence the potency could not inhere in the
result. If, on the other hand, itj be assumed thai; the result
appears immediately after the performance of the action, then
^in that case, there would be no necessity for assuming any such
potency; and there would be nothing to postpone the actual
experiencing of the result at that same time. It might be
argued that,—" at that time the performer is not endowed with
the particular kind of body and organs necessary for the actual
experiencing of the result,1' But then in that case the result
is as good as not appeared ; as '«heaven' is nothing more than
a particular kind of expedence. And as for the assumption
of a form of pleasure that is not experienced, this would be
an assumption of something not actually perceived. Hence the
Apürva cannot be regarded as inhering in the result.
Nor could any result accure to the Self, from a potency
inhering in such eternal substances as Äkäsha and the like;
in as much as being a reality, it could not subsist! without
a substratum. Hence it must be admitted to be. produced as
inhering in th« Self. And hence u could not be regarded as a
potency of the Action ; as the potency of one thing (action) can.
never subsist in another thing (the Self,).

5S8

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AtfD DISSIMILARITIES.

Objection1. "We might, on the strength of actual
assume the subsistence of the poiea&y of on,e thing in another!
thing; as has been declared in the following käXi>k&; * A potency!
19 always to be iuferred from the effect« produced > and as such '
ifc must be regarded as subsisting in that tuiag wherein it may J
be found to exist,—ia the same thing or in a different being |
thing,. (Tantravartika—ll-i-h, Taxt^Page .372)."
|
Reply: This ia not admit .ble; as when the substance (Action) |
to which the potency actually belongs, has been destroyed^ the |
potency can not (even though subsisting ia another substance,
the Self) bring about the result, independently of the former
substance.
This same reasoning sets aside the declaration made by
Mandana Migra ia bis Yidhivivekoi,, to the effect that—
15
the potency, having been originated by the action, must
sabsisb in. the same." Because the fact of the potency having
beta originated by the sacrifice would only make it an effect of
that sacrifice; and this would not mean that the poteqcy belongs to, or subsists in, that same sacrifice ;. as the result is not
found t) appear from the action as aided by the potency (as the
action does not exist at the time of the appearing of the result).
Thus then, it must be admitted that the actien having long
ceased to exi^t, the result follows from the Apürva as aided by
the peculiarities of time, place and other attendant circumstances; and thus it is the Apürva that comes to be the means for
the accomplishment of the desired end. And as for the Vedic
declaration of sacrifices being the means of accomplishing desirable ends,—the causal efficiency of sacrifice« must be taken at
applying to them, not directly, but through the intervening
agency of the Apürva produced by them.
For these reasons it is ooly right to hold that Dharma is a
property of the person.

PRA<?ASTAPADA BH^SHYA—CHAP VI. SECTION (10).
As for the fact of the- sacrifice aud such other actions being
called • Dkarma', this name »iao is due to the fact of th-eir being
the direct cause of the production of the rApürva ; just in the
same manner as the uame ' heaven' is applied to that which
produces happiness.
Page (275). That is to say, we find that the Jyotishtoma, which is laid down as accomplishing * heaven *, is
alwayä eulogised in the valedictory passage? of the Veda a* the
means of happiness; the» again, ia the case of such substances as
sandal-p.aste and the Uke, we find that the name ' heaven * is
applied fca them only when they afford pleasure, and not otherwise; and this leads us to think that the application of the name
' heaven' depends upojj the production of happiness. And in
this case we find that even though the word * heaven' actualy
denotes only happiness, yet it is used in the sense of 'that
which affords happiness;' and hence the word generally*has
come to afford the sense of the ' cause of happiness'; but as this
meaning could be explained as being due to the secondary signification (Indication) of the word, it is not at all necessary to
regard the word as having the double denotative potency.
Exactly in the same manner, the word ' dharma* may be used,
indirectly or figuratively, in the sense of 'that which produces
dharma1; *nd thus the single denotation of the word being
enough to explain its double signification and usage, we can have
no justification for assuming the twofold denotation.
Such in brief, is the reasoning propounded by the Logicians'
or Rationalists.
Dkarma is superaensuoua—i. e it cannot be perceived by
means of any organ» of perception, except by Yogis.
Dharrna is destructible by the experiencing of the last item
of happiness. In as much as Dharma is an effect, it must come
to an end; nor can Anything be destroyed without adequate
cause; hence its destruction being sure, it would continue so
lung as its results would be appeariug. The results of Dharma

590

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

1

are such as can be experienced, in some cases, during thousands of
years; and under the circumstances, if such a Dharma were to
be destroyed by its very first* result, there would be nothing left to produce the remaining factors of its result; nor is it ^
possible for Dharma to be destroyed in parts; as it is an absolutely impartite entity. Ifc is for these reasons that Dharma ia
held to be destructible ^by the last item of happiness resulting
from ifc,
Dharma is also destroyed by True Knowledge. Some
people hold Dharma to be absolutely indestructible; bufc for
these people there could be no Final Deliverance ; as there
would be no «nd of Dharmas and Adhannas (and hence of the
results of these in the shape of worldly experiences).
It is produced by the contact of the Han with the internal
organ—because it is a specifie quality of the Self, like pleasure
&c. Then again* Dharma ia produced by such means as pure
thoughts and determinations,—i. e. such thoughts and ideas as
are free from deceit, hypocrisy &c.
With regard to the different castes and conditions of men
there are distinct means of accomplishing Dharma. The
* castes' are the Brähmana, the Kshattriya, the Vaicja and the
Shudra. The ' conditions' are those of the * Student \ the
'Householder', the ' Recluse' and the 'Renunciate \ And
with regard to each of these, Dharma is produced by such means
as are prescribed for each by the scriptures.
Question: " Whence could we learn the means of accomplishing Dharma which is imperceptible by the senses ?"
Answer: The cause of Dharma consists in the various'
substances e.'c, ete.t * gruti ' (Veda) is that which is learct, with
due ceremony, only from the mouth of the Teacher, and is never
written down and then learnt (from books) ;—' Smrti' (Law)
consists in the declarations of Manu and others. The Substances, Qualities an<l Actions laid down in these two—the Veda
and the Law-books—are the general means of Dharma.

PARQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

59 \

The author now proceeds to point out; those means of
accomplishing Dliarma that apply iu common to all men, of
whatever caste and condition of life. (I) Faith in Dharma,—i. e.,
openness of mind in matters relating to Dharma« (2) Harmleasnead—i. eM determination never to do any harm to any living
being; mere desisting from doing harm would only couduce
to the unappearance of Adharma, and it would not produce
any positive Dharma \ but the determination to desist constitutes a positive virtue also, and being prescribed as such, would
be conducive to Dharma. (3) Benevolence towards all beings—a
kindly feeling towards them. (4; Truthfulness-^s&ying what
is absolutely true (5) Freedom from desire for undue possession
—-i. e., the determination thatl shall never take anything belonging
to another person, except in a way sanctioned by the scri ptures
and uot the mere negative action of not taking anything belongiog to another. (6) Freedom from £ws£-—determination to avoid
being too much addicted to sensual pleasures (7) Purity of
1 ntentions—*-when an action is done with pure intentions it
conduces to Diiarma. (8) Absence of anger—'determination to
renounce auger. (9j Bathing. (10) Use of 'purifying substances-~i. e., the constant use, on stated occasions, ot such purifying
substances as the seasamuin seed and the like. (11) Devotion to the Deity—i. e.t to any one of the Deities spoken
of in the Vedas. (12). Fasting—determination to eat anything
on such days as the Ek.ldashi and the like. (13) Non-neglect
(of duties)—i. e., the pet formauce of the daily and occasional
duties without fail. All these are the duties or virtues pertaining in common to all men,
(1) Performing of sacrifices—i. e., the offering of sacrifices
and the pouring of oblations. (2) Study—of.the Veda. (3)
Charities—i. e., the determination to transfer to the possession
of nuother person something belonging to oneself; as Charity is
a virtue for a Qadia also, the form of charity that is meant here
is that which is given at sacrifices aud such other occasions.
These are the duties pertaining to the three higher castes.

592

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

The special duties pertaining to the Brahmana are next*|
described:—(1) Receiving of gifts—i.e., from duly qualified
persons. (2) Teaching. (3) Officiating at sacrifices. These
belong to the Brahniana alone ; as he can perform Dharma by •
means of the wealth acquired by these means only. (4) Dutj
performance of the rites and ceremonies prescribed jor the%
caste—the forty-eight purificatory ritea duly performed make the I
Brahmana fit for the performance of the Vedic ritea and cere- I
monies; and as auch become conducive to Dharma (acquired I
by such rites and ceremonies).
j
The special duties belonging to the Kshatlriya are these— j
(1) Froper care of the people under him—i. e., the due protection ;
of such of his peeple.as are good and law-abiding. (2) Punish- ;
ing of criminals—i.e., the inflicting of due punishment pres- \
cribed in the scriptures upon the wicked among his people. (3)
Not to fly from battles-^ri. e., continuing to fight till victory is .;
attained or he is killed. (4) The performance of the rites and 'ceremonies necessary for the Ks/iattriya.
. Of the Vaiqya, the specific duties are:—(1) Buying— i
the taking of something belonging to another person after %
giving due value for it. (2) Selling—giving to another person \
something belonging to himself after receiving due value for
it. (3) Agriculture—the sowing of seeds in well-tilled
soil, and the transplanting of seedlings. (4) Tending of
cattle—the proper care of cows, goats, sheep and other
useful animals. These are the specific duties of the
Vaicya, as for him it is oniy the wealth acquired by
these means that can rightly help iu the due performance of his religious duties.
Of the güdra, the specific duty consists in subservience to
the three higher caates; and his reljgious rites are performed
without man11 as.

PARgASTAJPÄDA BHÄ3HTA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

^93

The author next proceeds to describe the duties pertaining
to the various conditions of life. For the student livir^g at
the house of his Teacher <&c. The proper ' teacher' is onejwho
initiates his pupil and then teaches him the Yeda with all its
subsidiaries and esoteric explanations; and for the student
living (as a boarder) at the house of such a Teacher, the duties
laid down in the scriptures are—(i) Attendance upon the
teacher—i. e., serving him in many ways ; (2; Attendance on
the fire—i. e., daily offering of oblations into it ; (3) Fetching
of fuel—from the forest, for the sake of the sacrificial fire;
and (4) Living on alms.
The duties of the Householder are next described. A student while he is learning the Veda leads a life in which he keeps
certain observances and follows certain rules of life and conduct;
and when he has finished his studies he renounces these vowa
and restrictions; and it is such a person who is called the
* Vidydvratasnätaka' (who has closed the religious life of
the student by having taken the * Final Bath'); and it is suoh
a person who on taking a wife becomes a * Householder '; and
for him the duties prescribed are—(A) Morning and evening
offering of the five * great sacrifices' by means of the wealth
acquired by such methods as the Qälina and the Yäyävara.
When a man receives from the person who comes to make a
gift to him, only so much as fills a certain vessel and is enough
for his food for one or three days, this is called the 'Qälina'
method of livelihood ; and when he does not receive gifts from
any definite person, but begs hi3 living from house to house,
in due rotation, this is called the ' Yäyävara ' method; and
the Dharma of the Householder is duly accomplished by his
performing in the morning and in the'evening, the five great
sacrifices with what he acquires in the aforesaid manner ; these
' great sacrifices ' are—(1) Sacrifice to animals—i. e., making
of offerings meant to be eaten by animals ; (2) Sacrifice to
men—attending upon aud feeding of guests ; (3) Sacrifice to
divine beings—in the shape of Homa ; and (4) Sacrifice to the
35

594

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

Father8—performance of the Qtäddhas\ and (5) Sacrifice to
Brahman—regular study and recitation of the Veda. (B) The
taking or kindling of the Ekägni Fire—also called the * Aupäsanika Fire' at the time of marriage; and the offering, in
accordance with his capacity, into that Fire, of the Fäkayajnas—
i. e.t such sacrifices as the ' Ashtakd1 (performed on. the eighth
day of some months), the ' Färvana * (performed on the day
on which the moon is absolutely invisible), the * Caitri' (performed on the fullmoon day in the month of Gaitra), the
' JgvayvjH (performed on the fullmoon day of the mouth of
Agvitta), and such others as are laid down as absolutely necessary , and also the performing of such sacrifices as the Agnya*
dlieya '—i. e.t the laying or kindling of the fire by the Brähmana,
at spring-tide—, the Haviryajnas—the sacrifices of the Dargapürnamäsa, the Cäturmäsya, the Ägräyana and the like,—
and the ' Agnishtoma,' sacrifices—viz., the seven Soma sacrifices
named * Ukthya,'^ Shodugin,'' Väjapeya,'' Atirätra,' * Jpta' and
* Aryamä! (C) Avoidance of sexual intercourse except at
stated times is also conducive to Dharma ; and the begetting of
children is conducive to Dharma as declared in the Veda—.'by
means of the son one wins desirable worlds.1
The duties of the 'Recluse' are next described. It is laid
down that the student may retire into the forest on the very
day that he. may like to do so ; hence the student, without
passing into the life of the Householder, can become a Recluse
all at once; but some people pass through the intermediate
state of the Householder before retiring into the forest; and
for both kinds of Recluse, the following duties are laid down :
Wearing of the bark of trees and skins only, the non-shaving of
hair and beard &c, and the non-paring of nails; living upon
only wild fruits and roots,—and that also only those that may
be left after the offerings have been made into the fire, and
the guests have been duly fed. A person who having performed
the Präjcjpatya sacrifice makes a gift of all his belongings,
takes the sacrificial fire into himself and leaving to his cw$e the

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄ3HYA—CHAP VI. SECTION (10).

595

care of his st>n goes away as a Recluse—for him there are no
offerings, and no serving of guests. But one who retires into
the forest taking with him his wife and the sacrificial fire, for
him it is laid down that he should live upon the remnant left
after the performance of sacrifices and the serving of guests.
Page 278* The duties of the Eenunciate are next described. With regard to the life of Renunciation also there is
no such hard and fast rule that it can be entered only by a man
who has passed through the other three states ; in fact even one
in the earliest stage of the student,—or even a Householder,
—if he is endowed with strong faith and due earnestness, he can
—betake himself to that life; and when entering this life, the
roan tak es the vow of unstinted benevolance towards all beings;
renouncing all such actions as ure performed with personal
motives, he remains firm in the observance of all internal and
external duties of Yama and Niyama. ' Yama1 consists in Harmlessness, Truthfulness, Freedom undue Possession, Celibacy and
Non-acceptance of gifts, as laid down by Patanjali in his Yogasutras (11-30); and l Niyamay consists in the Keeping of Observances, Cleanliness, Contentment, Study, Contemplation of the
God-head, as laid down by Patanjaii in his Sutras (11-32). The
author of the Byäyabhsähya (PP. 220-21) has laid down
special duties for each of the four conditions of life. When the
person is careful in the observance of these miles* of life, he
acquires the true knowledge of all the six categories, and then
triea to attain * Yoga/ which is a particular state of meditation
that brings about the knowledge of the Self. This constitutes
the D\arma of the Renunci&te.
The author proceeds to show in whajb manner these are
conducive to Dharma:—When the duties detailed above are
performed with the purest of intentions, without any regard
to personal gain in the form of riches or wealth, then theybring
about the miud-i oul COL tact, which brings about Dharma.
When the man finds himself daily hampered by pain, he
]
n doe time comes to the conclusion that objects of the world

596

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

m

are the aole source of all pain ; and thushe becomes disgusted with
the objects ; and desiring a cessation of pain, the only unfailing
means that he has is the realisation of the true nature of hie
Self. And this realisation is brought about by meditation.
Knowing this, the man gives up all actions that have a
personal end in view, and gives himself up to meditation ; but
finding that living among men in a village stands in the way of
proper meditation, he relinquishes the village and other haunts
of men and goes away into the forest; there having purified
himself by the internal and external rules of life, he acquires
Dharma by the practice of meditation which tends r-o the
cessation of his troubles. By constant practice he g'»es on
progressing towards higher and bigher stages of meditation during
a number of lives, till during his last life on earth, he attains to
that stage of perfect meditation which cannot be disturued by
the slightest notion of duality (i. e., he thinks of nothing else).
In ordinary experience we find that when we are thinking very
intently on an object, we become so absorbed in it that even
very attractive objects. fail to attract us; as for instauce an
archer having his mind fixed by practice on the arrow, does
not notice the king who may pass by him. Says Patanjali: ' The
controlling of the functoning of the mind follows from exercise
and dtspassion ' (Yogasutra 1-12). When in this manner meditation has reached the most perfect state, there appears a full
cognition of the true character of Self, Say the Sankkyas—
1
Thus it is that by the practice of truth wisdom is attained, which
is complete and incontrovertible (and hence) pure, and absolute;
(by means of which the idea is obtained that) / om not, naught
is mine and I do not exist' (Sänlckyakärikä 64). It is for this
reason then that the Renunciate who desires the true knowledge
of Self takes to the performance of Yogic practices.
Objection: " A knowledge is always found to lead to the
attainment of the object known ; and hence the knowledge of
Self obtained from the mere teaching of a teacher woald make
the true nature of the Self attained ; what then would be the

PRA$ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTTON- (10.)

597

use ot seeking a direct perception of it through Yogic practices?"
Reply : Not so ; as an indirect means can never bring about
a direct perception.
In reality the Self is neither the doer nor the enjoyer; it
is wholly indifferent. And it is only when it becomes connected
with such limitations as those of the body and the sense-organs,
that it comes to have such notions, as ' I' and * mine,' of its being
the doer and the enjoyer; and such notions cannot but be
regarded as false; as they represent tilings as what in reality they
are not, From these notions of ' I ' and ' mine' follow an
affection for the pleasant, and aversion to the unpleasant thing;
these affections and aversions give rise to activity and cessation
form activity; thence follow Dharma and Adha/ma ; and this
lands the Self into the cyele of birth aud rebirth. This has
been thus declared by the ßauddhas : ' In the ever-existing Self,
the idea of difference comes in wbetj there is a distinction made
between the / and the iiot-I; thence aris^ affection and aversion ;
and ic is as affected by the^e two that all conditions are brought
into existence.'
That every Self in earthly life is under the influence of
beginningless tendencies aud impression*, and as such is by its
very nature as it were ' bound'—is a directly perceptible cognition thar, has a very firm hold on the minds of the people. The
knowledge of Self, however, that is acquired by mere verbal
teaching ,hws but a momentary existence, and is not tested and
found compatible with actual experience, and is iudirecfc. An
idea that has a tleast r.he semblance of being* a direct cognition
can never be set asid* by that which at its best is only indirect.
For instance, even though ail the other means of knowledge
mighc indicate to a mui that sugar is sweet, yet if his organ of
taste happen to be perverted, making tue sugar taste bitter to
him, he would never be able to get rid of this idea, and the
consequent dislike for the object.
Hence with a view to acquire the direct knowledge of Self,

598

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

it becomes necessary to have recourse to meditation ; and when
meditation has reached the perfect stage, tne true nature of the
Self, preciusive of all notions of its being the doer or the enjoyer,
becomes distinctly cognisable ; and as with regard to'one and
the same object Knowledge and Ignorance are contradictory and
mutually exclusive, there comes about a cessation of all ideas of
1
1 ' and ' mine'; and when this stage is reached the phenomenal
world, even though existing, ceases to affect that Self. This is
thus described by the Sänkhyas,—' Possessed of this true knowledge, the Soul, as a spectator at leisure, at ease and pure, free
from all taint of Rajas and Tamas, beholds Nature which has
now retired from its seven forms (Dharma, Knowledge Dispassion,
Power, Adharma, Ignorance, Absence of dispassiou and AbseLee of
Power) on account of her prolific fruition (tending to bring about
experiences to the Soul), under the "force of true wisdom *
(Sankhyakärikä-65).
Page 280. Though Jtbe delusive tendencies of the Self
are beginniogless, and true knowledge has beginning in time, yet
the latter sets aside the former; as in the perception of truth lies
the greatest strength of the intellect.
Text (134): Adharma also is a quality of the Self; it is
conducive to sin and undesirable results; it is
imperceptible ; destructible by the congnition of
the last item of pain (resulting from it). Its causes
are—(1) the doing of actions which are prohibited
in the scriptures, and which are contrary to the
causes of Dharma; e.g., Barm fulness, Untruthfulness, Undue Possession; (2) the Nonperformance^of actions enjoined in the scripture»;
and (3) Neglect. These, along with impurity of
motives,—tend to the mindcontact bringing about
Adharma (Vl-ii-Z, 4, 6, 7; V/-i-5, 7, 8^.
Commentary.
Not only Dharma, but Adharma also is a property of th e

PRACJASTAPÄDA BflÄSHYA-CHAP. TL SECTION" (10.)

599

Self; it brings about * sin', which is a source of future trouble and
also ' undesirable results ' in the form of actual troubles. It is
destroyed by the full experience of the last item of pain
resulting from it. Ife is brought about by such actions as are
prohibited ia the scriptures ; and also by the conscious nonperformance of those that are laid down as ' necessary' duties ; as
also by * neglect' i. «., the unconscious transgression of duties.
In a case where an immoral act is done with a set purpose we
have what is called an ' impurity of intentions'; and this is
conducive to Adkarma ; when however it is done wifchouö any
motive, theu it becomes included under ' Neglect.'

Text (135): When the man dues not attain true knowUdge, and is ntill under the influence of
affections and aversions, the doing of excellent
vituous deeds endowed with great motive
power, accompained by a slight taint of sin,
leads him to contact with desirable bodies
and sense-organs and consequent experience of
pleasures &c, in accordance with the impressions
(left by his previous actions),—in such regions as
those of Brahma, of Indra, of Prajdpati, of
Pitrs, or of Men. Similarly the performance
of bad sinful acts, accompained by a slight
touch of virtue, brings about his contact with
bodies and sense-organs and consequent experience of pains &c.t—in such regions as those of
ghosts and of the lower animals. And thus by
the performance of such virtuous deeds as are in
the form of out-going activity (of the sou/), accompr&ned by sin, the man passes through the
various divine, human and animal regions, again
and again; and this is whit constitutes his
* wheel of bondage.' (Vl—ii—16).

600

QUALITIE8 : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES

Commentary.
Page 281. Having, described the causes of Adharma, the
author proceeds to explain its affects, One who tifinks himself
to he the Doer and the Bnjoytr, and who takes the external
and internal objects of experience (i. e., the objects and the
experiences produced by them) fco be real sources of pleasure,—
though in reality they are sources of pain and trouble,—is called
* ignorant/ c without true knowledge;' such a person being
hammed in on all sides by desires for his own experience, becomes
attachttd to such objects as he considers to be conducive to pleasure
to him ; and acquires an aversion to those whom he 'considers
to be obstructive of his pleasure; and when such a man performs
certain acts productive of Dharma with the motive of being
börn again as a divine being or a Gandharva, he actually becomes connected with—i. e, obtains—the body, the sense-organs
&c, in du« accordance with the impressions and effects of the
acts he has performed. But there is a touch of pain even in
the regions of Brahma himself (to say nothing of the regions
of the lower gods); and as pain is never] produced except by
Adharma, the author has added the qualification—' accompained by a slight taint of sin.* One whose Dharma
is of the ordinary kind, obtains a good enough body and
organs ; whose Dharma is of a better kind has a better body ;—
and he who has Dharma of the best mind has the best of
bodies &c;—this is what is meant by the qualification
in accordance with the impressions left by his previous actions.' The word 'ishta* ' desirable', is to be construed with
each of the things meotioned, body and the rest; as it appears
at the end of the Dvandva or copulative compound.
Similarly by an excess of Adharma one goes to the regions
of ghosts and lower animals, being equipped with undesirable
bodies and sense-organs &c. But there issome^slight pleasure in
these regions also ; and this could only he due to Dharma; hence
the qualification—' accompained by a taint of Virtue/

BSÄSHTA-CHATV VI. SECTION (10).

601

Text (136) : When a man with due knowledge ( intelligently) performs acts of Dharma without any
thought of the result to follow therefrom, he comes
to be born in a pure family; and being thus bom
fie has a longing for finding out the means for the
absolute removal of pain; and with this end in view,
he betakes himself to a properly qualified teacher,
and obtains from him the true knowledge of the
six categories, which removes his ignorance; then
having acquired thorough dispassion, he becomes
free from alt affections, aversions and other such
like feelings; and the absence of these puts a stop
to the production of any Dharma or Adharma ; the
Dharma and Adharma of his previous lives being exhausted, by his experiences of pleasures and pains,
and aU affections <&c. having ceased, all his actions
henceforth are only such as are of the nature of pure
'Dhartoia,' tending forwards * cessation* or ' peace';
and these actions produce in him the happiness of
content ment and a ^disregard for the body; and
having brought about happiness <f ae to the vision
of highest truth, this Dharma also disappears. And
thus there being a complete cessation, the soul becomes * seedless'; and the present body falling off,
it takes no other bodies, and this cessation of
equipment with bodies and organs, being like the
extinguishing of fire on all its fuel being burnt
up, constitutes what is called c Moksha," * Final
Deliverance: ( Vf—ii—lß; 7— n—16,18).
Commentary.
Page 282. Having described the process of birth and
rebirth though Dharma and Adharma, the author proceeds to
describe Final Deliverance. A man has the knowledge Ihat he
* ' Parikhedam' is the decidedly better reading ;' pariccheda' do«« not give
much sense.
_

602

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

in reality is indifferent to ail things external and internal, all
of which are sources of trouble; and then he comes to lose ail
longing for the pleasures arising from perceptible and imperceptible causes (the latter being those laid down in the scriptures) ; that is to say, he ceases to have any such desire as
' may it be thus/ * may such and such thing be mine/ and ao
forth; and thus having no desire for results, he performs only
(those actions that are laid down as leading to 'cessation' or peace,
or those that are prescribed as absolutely necessary duties ; and
these actions, performed with due knowledge, lead to the person
being born, on his next birth, in a pure and noble family; a man
not well born is never endowed with true faith ; a man devoid of
true faith is never moved by a desire to learn the truth ; and without such desire one cannot attain true kuowledge ; and one devoid
of tru« knowledge can never attain deliverance. Consequently
actions performed without any desire for results, and tending to
deliverance, make the man born in a noble family.
Being born in a noble family the man finds himself daily
suffering from a number of troubles ; and is moved to find out
some means for the removal of such troubles. Moved by this desire
he betakes himself to a duly qualified teacher, who imparts to
him the true knowledge of the six categories; haviug thus
acquired a verbal knowledge of these, he goes through the
practice of {gravana ' or ' listening to i:he teachings/ * manana
or 'reflecting over the thiögs learnt,' and c nididhyäsana'
or ' constant meditation over it'; and thereby acquires the
direct knowledge of the categories.
Having acquired this True Knowledge, he becomes free
from ' Ignorance'—i e., from all mistaken cognitions, along with
the impressions and longings resulting from these ; and thereby
becoming endowed with dispassion,—i. e.t freedom from the
effects of affection and aversioo,—he becomes free from all
affections and aversions; and thenceforth he produces no Dharma
or Adharma, which are the product of those affections and
aversions. That is to say, the activities of a man are produc-

PRAQA&TAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10)

fifä

tive of Dharma and Adkarma only when accompained by the
* Kleshas* (Ignorance. Egoism, Affection, Avwrai©», Attachment) and impressions; just as the seed of rice can sprout
up only when it is covered with the husk ; hence when the
Klsehas have been destroyed, tne actions being like unhusked
rice, ceases to produce Dharma and Adharma. Says Patanjaii :
Mi is only when the seed is there that we can have the fruits in
the shape of birth, life, and other experiences' (Yogasutraa—
II—13), and also Gautama : " Activity is noc productive of effects
for one whose Klesko» have been destroyed *
Page 283« The Dharma and Adkarma lefb by the
previous actions of the person come to be destroyed by hi»
experiences during present life; and thenceforth his actions
tend to produce only such Dkarma as are conducive to'nwrtti'
i. «., * cessation/ of birtb and rebirth ; and this Dharma appearing in its purest form, 'being free from ail affections and aver»
sioos, brings aboat happiness of contentment and disregard for
the body; and having produced happiness born of the perception
of the true nature of the self, it disappears.
Thus then, when Dharma disappears after having brought
about) self-knowledge, the self becomes free Horn such
* seeds" of fature birtb as Dharma and Adkarma; and the
body accupied by the soul during the time ceasing to exist, on
the exhaustion of all the effects of its previous activity, and
there being no eause left for the taking by the self of other
bodies, there is a complete cessation of these embodiments;
just Hke the extinguishing of the fire that has burnt all its- fuel
(th* Dharma and Adharma being the 'fuel' in the present
instance); and it it this cessation that constitutes ' Deliverance/
In connection wifeh Deliverance we have to consider the
following question: Does Deliverance follow from Knowledge
alone, or from the combination of Knowledge and Action t

604

QUALITIES.: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

We hold that Deliverance follows from the combination of
KnowieUge aud Action. Even when ,a. ai&n nas ceased to bave
any other desires, and has ceased from the performance of
actions for results, he does not become free from the obligation
to perform the * necessary' duties, as also those that are
prescribed for certain definite occasions. For instance,, there
are certain duties laid dowu for all Brahmanas; and the man
desiring Deliverance would be as much a Brähmajaa as any
other,—his caste remaining the same; and hence, if while hairing
the obligation, he should omit thes$ duties, he would be daily
committee a sin, which would lead to the most undesirable qi
bondages for him. This has been thus declared;—[ These actions
that are performed for the sake of certain results, and those
that are prohibited, bind the soul; and the necessary and
occasional duties also have a tendency to bind when their
performance is neglected.
:
Objection: "The non-performance of the prescribed du tie«,
would be a negative entity; and a negative entity con Id
never produce any positive entity in the shape of Sin."
Reply: The sin would be produced by other causes, set in
motion by the non-performance of prescribed duties. We do
not accept the causal efficiency, of a negative entity by itself;
but no one can deny such efficiency of it when it subserves itself
to a positive entity. Then again, as a matter, of fact, the soul is
never wholly inactive physically, verbally or mentally, in the
morning and evening (for which times certain acts of meditation
&c, are prescribed as necessary for the Brähmana), as the very act
living is an action. To this end we have the following
declaration :—
Page 284. * The previous negation of actions thafc we
have at the time of the non-performance of necessary duties
does not lose its negative character by the mere feet of its being
productive of Si»; as what produces the Sin is not actually
the non-performance of those duties, but the performance through

PEAgASTAPÄDA BÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION" (10)

605

foolishness of other acts at a time for which other duties ar&
laid down in the scriptures,; so that the sin in this case is not
produced by the nonperformance only.
Objection: " Siu follows from the doing of that which is
prohibited j the- act of living in the body is not one that ia
prohibited
o if a mam were to live in the body bat omit
the.perfor-rnjcd of the evening and morning meditations, what
harm could there be in this?"*
Reply : In as much as the duties prescribed are such as
must be performed at the appoiuted time it follows that
at that time the performance of the act of mere living is
prohibited; and hence a man who would be merely living, (and
not performing the meditations in the morning and in the
evening) would be doing something that is prohibited, and
thereby acquiring sin.
Objection : " The Kuowledge of Self, brought about by a long
coarse of contemplation, carried on strenuously and unceasingly,
while destroying affection and aversion from their very roots,
would certainly destroy the sin accruing from the non-performance of the prescribed duties."
Reply: This is not. right; as when practice is carried on
favourably, then the Knowledge of truth that appears destroys
all doubtful and mistaken cognitions; and this knowledge has
never been found to have the power of setting aside anything
else. If the Knowledge of self were to destroy actions, then it
would destroy those actions that would be undergoing fruition
(i, e.# whose results will have been begun to be experinced by
the person); and if this were the case, then the state of
Jivanmvkti—* Deliverance while living1—would be an absolute,
impossibility ; as no sooner would the person obtain the knowledge
of truth than his actions having been destroyed, his body would
fall off. As a matter of fact however, we find this state in actual
• A.' na * isovrioualy required in tjw text : a» even the Siddhauti does not
hold any sin to follow from the performance of the necessarp duties while
living in the body.

606

QUALITIES : SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

experience, as we find that a man, though having his ignorance
destroyed by true knowledge, still continues to lire awaiting
the falling ofiE of his body, looking upon the world as a mere
imaginary picture, and not having bis affection fixed upon even
a single thing of the world, but undergoing the experiences
resulting from such of his previous actions as have their productive force limited to his present life ; his body continuing to exist
by reason of the unexhausted" forceaof his>previous actions, though
the impelling force of fresh actions has been withdrawn, in the
manner of the potter's wheel, which continues to revolve even
after the operation of the pocter has ceased, by reason of the
momentum already imparted to it. That such is the ease is
declared by the Yeda itself—'The wise man while living
becomes free from pleasures and pains/ To the same end we
have the following declaration of the Sänkhyas: ' True
knowledge having been obtained, Dharma and other agencies
become deprived of their productive efficiency ; and yet the son)
continues to exist in the world, being endowed with the body
through the force of previous actions, just like the revoling of
the wheel' (Sdnkkyakdrkä—67). What is meant by
Dkarma becoming deprived of its productive efficiency is
that the tendencies and the Kleskos (Ignorance &e.) having
been destroyed by the knowledge if truth, Dkarma and the
other agencies become deprived of their necessary causal force.
It might be regard that,—" The knowledge of truth destroys
such actions as have not actually begun to function towards
fruition/' But this would not be possible; as these actions
also would be incapable of being destroyed by that knowledge ;
just as much as those actioos whose fruition has already commenced. As for the teaching that—' the Supreme One having been
perceived, all his actions are destroyed,'—all that is meant by
this is that when the man has obtained the knowledge of truth,
all new actions cease to appear ; and not that the actions
already done are destroyed. This is borne out by another
declaration of the scriptures : ' An action, until its result has

BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION ^10).

607

been experienced, ig pot destroyed even in millions of years.1
Objection: " If knowledge does not destroy actions, then,
how are the actions accumulating through many lives, destroyed 1
If they were destroyed by the experiencing of their results, and
alao by the performance of actions prescribed forthat purpose (of
destroying previous actions),—then, how could innumerable
actions he destroyed during a single life ?
Reply: There is no restrction of time as to the destruction of actions^; just as fresh actions are being accumulated
during «ach life, so also are certain previous actions destroyed
in each life by the fact of their resultshavingbeen experienced during that life. And those, that may not have been destroyed before
the man obtains true knowledge, are destroyed by actual
experiencing of their results in the order of the forces set in
motion by those actions, and also by fresh actions performed
to that end. This has been thus declared:—' The nfan knowing
the true nature of the soul has got to destroy all his actions ;
and it is for this reason that after millions of years we have a
soul attaining Deliverauce.'
Thus then, the omission of necessary duties being productive
of sin, and sin being a source of bondage, from which there
is no freedom by any other means,—if the man wishes to
avoid 'sin, and attain Deliverance, he should perform
such of the prescriebed duties at their proper times, as may
not be incompatible with his practice of meditation,—just like
the actions of begging food and eating it; and this he should
continue until he clearly perceives the true nature of the soul.
And even for one who has realised the true nature of the
soul and who is thus a ' jivanmukta\ it is necessary to perform
the necessary duties so long as he lives in the world with his
body. When however he withdraws himself within the Self,
and has his final Delivernece near at hand, then, all his actions
being nearly destroyed, they are as good as totally destroyed ;
as there is no external consciousness'of the few that might still
remain. And at this time what appears is only the internal

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.
cognition &£ the true nature of th« so«i,l —a cognition whkto
is purified by the force of perfected meditation, which closes
the range of experiences by force of accumulated Dispassion ;
and this resolves [all «things into one which uproot« all tendencies towards ignorance, and concentrates the inner
organ towards the single point of soul-perception ; this
perception is wholly internal, übe operation of the external
organs having entriely ceased. Under such circumstances, whence
could their be any poseibility of further actions ? Says the Qruti\
* When he does not hear, he is said to have become Unified
&C1 At this time there is no *>in accruing form the non-per
formance of prescribed duties—as all duties cease to exist for
him who is no longer conscious of distinctions of time—as that
' it is evening now' (aud c I must say my evening prayers/) and
so on—or of castes and conditions as that * I am a Brdhraana'
and .so forth. This has been thus declared : * How could the
man devoid of such self egotism as that 1 aim, a Brahmana
perform any acts.' For such a person again who has
ceased from all activity, and who exists like a log of wood,
could not have any such sin accruing to him, as follows from
the killing of animate.
AB for the continuance for a short time of the body of th*
person who has psreeived What was to be perceived and has
destroyed what had to be destroyed, having bis mind wholly
under his control, who is beyond the reach of pleasures and
pains caused by the perception, remembrance and reflection
of sensual objects, and who has his meditation securely fixed
in Brahman,—this is due to the non-destruction of that much of
his action which goes to limit his life-period which keeps his
body in the world ; and as soon as tbis time-limit has been
reached, the said Action having its work finished, disappears;
and immediately after this its effect, the Body, also drops off;
and when the Body has dropped off, along with all the organs,
internal und external, the knowledge of truth (which is an
effect of the internal organ) also ceases; and what is left is the
Self alone in its isolated grandeur.

PRA£ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10).

609

Thus then, we have found that the Knowledge of the trus
nature of Self and th» Performance of Prescribed Duties
operate coojoiatly towards the setting aside of those actions that
tend to Bondage. The man knowing the Self to be something
distinct from the body &c, does not regard the favours and
disfavours towards these latter to be his Self; and thus ail notions
of ' 1' and ' mine' having ceased, he ceases to have any affection towards that which is favourable, or aversion towards the
unfavourable ; this indifference puts a. stop to hia further
activity; and there is no further accumulation of fresh
actions; the previous accumulations become gradually exhausted, either by actual experience, or by other actions (tending to
counteract the force of the previous actions); then, as for the
sin acoruiug from the non-performance of prescribed duties,
thia is avoided by the actual performance of those duties;
and thus all kinds of Actions having beeu exhausted, when his
present body falls off, there are no causes left for the appearance
of another body for him ; and hence his S«lf reeaains left in its
own isolated position (free from the limitations of the body
&c,,). To this end we have the following declaration :—'The raaa
destroy, all his sin3 by the performance of alt necessary and
occasional duties, and purifies his Knowledge by practice,
and makes it perfect; and having hia Knowledge perfected by
practice, be attains Isolation.' Even philosophers of opposite
schools of thought have accepted the same view of the matter :.
* By action the nature is purified ; by Knowledge is the true
nature of the Self ascertained; by practice follows Deliverance
from the combination of the other too/
Question : " What is the truß nature &f the. Self, the resolution wher£ unto would constitute Deliverance?"
Some people hold that the nature of the Self consists in
bliss. But this theory is-not correct; as it will not befar an
examination of the possible alternatives.

610

QUALITIES : SIMILABITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

For instance, is this bliss actually experienced in the state
ot Deliverance, or not? If it is not experienced, then, even
though extant its is as good as non-existent; for the simple
reason that it is not enjoyable. If it is experienced in the state
of Deliverance, then it becomes necessary for you to point out
the cause of this experience. l?0u cannot find any such cause,
in the absence of the absolute disappearance of bodies and
organs. It might be argued that the contact of the internal
organ would be the cause of this experience; but this would not
be possible; as the internal organ or mind aids in this
manner only when it is influenced by Dharma and Adharma ;
and when the mind is such as has all seeds of good and evil
rooted out of it, it can never function towards any purpose of the
Self. It might be urged that the mind favours the Self by the
force of Dharma bora of Yogic practices. But even such
Dharma being a product, should be transient; and when this
would be destroyed, what would be there to help the mind ? "
Poge 287. Objection: " If the Self were unconscious, then
it would be like a block of stone which experiences neither
pleasure nor pain; and it the Self also were to experience
neither of these, what would be the difference between it and
a block of stone ? For this reosou we must regard consciousness to belong to the Self by its very nature; and when this
consciousness is drawn outwards by the sense-organs, it tends
outwards ; but when the sense-organs have ceased to exist, then
it becomes merged into the Self itself, whose nature consists
of pure bliss. The nature of bliss is such that it must illumine
or manifest (render cognisable) something. Hence during the
state of Deliverance, if it were to remain inactive (without
bringing about any experiences), it would be as good
as non-existent. And under the circumstances, it is far better
to regard the Self to be an unconscious being."
Reply: Does Consciousness consist in bliss by its very
nature; *r is bliss produced in it by some other cause ? In the

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP VI. SECTION (10).

ßi ]

state of deliverance there can be no such cause for the bringing
about of the experience (of bliss); as the body and the
sense-organs, which alone could be such causes, will have
wholly disappeared; as we have already explained above. Then
if bliss be held to belong to Consciousness by its very
nature, then this bliss would be experienced during the
metempsychic or worldly state also, (even without Deliverance).
It might be argued that during the worldly state, the bliss,
though extant, is not experienced, on account of its being
hidden or obstructed by Ignorance. But then, if bliss constituted the nature of Consciousness, in as much as this latter
is eternal, it could never be separated from what constitutes its very nature; and under the circumstances, what would
be tne meaning of the * hiding' or ' obstruction ' that you
speak of? If again, such deprivation of its very nature were
possible, what would be the eternality of such consciousness ?
Hence bliss must be regarded as eternal; and as such being
enlivened by the equally eteraal Consciousness, it would be
experienced equally in the ' worldly' and in the ' delivered '
state. As a matter of fact however, we do not find this to be
the case; as during the 'worldly1 state, until ' Deliverence'
is attained, the bliss or pleasure that the man experiences
is only that which can be cognised through the external
objects and the sense-organs.
For these reasons then, there can be no eternal bliss for the
Self; and hence the experiencing of blisa cannot constitute the
state of Deliverance. We must therefore regard Deliverance to
consist in the subsistence of the Self in its own pristine condition,
mArked by tbe cessation of all the specific qualities pertaining to
it (during the 'worldly ' state). And how this is the supreme
end of man's existence we have shown above (Text-pp.
6 and 7).
SOUND.
Text (137) : Sound is the property of Aklga (U-i-Tl).

612

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.
It is perceptible by the ear {Il-ii-21). It is
momentary ; and counteracted by iia effect, by its
cause and by both ; itis produced by Conjunction,
Disjunction and another sound; it has a limited
existence ; and is brought about by homogeneous
and hetrogene&as causes (2J-n-25-fo 32).
It is of two hinds—(1) in the form of letters and (2) in
the form of noise in general; the former is in the
shape of'a' and other letters, and the latter in
the shape of the noise produced by the blowing
of the conch and such things. Sound of the former
lcind proceeds from the contact of the mind and
soul as influenced by remembrance :—First of all
there is desire for pronouncing the letter ; this is
followed by an effort on the part of the speaker ;
and when this effort brings about the eonjnuction
of the %oul with air, there is produced in this air
a certain action {motion) ; this air moving
upwards strikes such places as the throat and
the ttk* ; this contact of the l place' and the air
brings about contact of the 'place1 with Akäca ;
and this contact produces the letter-sound.
Sounds of other kinds also are produced by the
contact of Jkiga with such substances as the
drum aud the like, this contact being brought
about by the contact of the drum and the stick.
Then again, sound is produced by such Disjunctions as the splitting of , the joints of the
bamboo, and that of Akäca and the bamboo;
and also from other sounds that may- have
been previously produced by certain conjunctions
and disjunctions. Sound is always produced in
a series, like the series of water-ripples ; and when
sound, appearing in the form of waves, reaches
the ear, it becomes perceiwd. As the Ear i8

PRA£ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. göESTION (10).

613

not found to go to the sound {where it in'produced), and the sound is not found to have
actually come to the Ear, and as there could be n#
perception of sound by the Ear, unless there were
some sort of an approach of the one by the other
—one cannotlbut accept the fact of sound being
produced in the form a line or series o] waves,
(i/ii-32).
Commentary.
Sound is the property of Äkäca.
Objection : " In as much Äkäca has other properties also,
in the shape of number and th« rest, how could sound be
defined as the ' property of Akäca f "
Reply: What is meant by th« definition is that,
the quality which, while being perceptible by the ear, belongs to
Äkäga is Sound.
With a view to net aside the opinions of others it is added
—It i^momentary—i, e. it is quickly destroyed, as ii proved by
the fact of its not being perceived the very moment aft«r it has
been produced. As there is nothing to prove that sound continue!
to exist, there can be no room for the assumption that the nonperception of it is due to the absence of proper manifesting
agencies; then, as for the recognition that' this is the same sound
that I had htard yesterday ',—this can be explained as being
due to similarity; as in the case of the flame (which is regarded
to be the same, while as a matter of fact there is only a series of
coutinuaily appearing and disappearing series of distinct
flames); specially as the fact of each sound (though similar)
being distincfe is proved by the difference in the degree of loudness or faintness of each individual sound.
It is counteracted by its effect, by its cause and by both. That
is to say, thefir»tsound that is produced is * counteracted ' by it»
effect (which destroys it); and the last sound is ' counteracted* by
its cause, the last but one sound (whieh is destroyed by it and

614

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

de8troy3 it), the last sound having no other cause for destruction ; the intervening sounds are ' counteracted ' by both (cause
and effect).
It is produced by Conjunctions, Disjunctions and Sound.
The first sound is produced by Conjunction as well as by Dis
junction ; while tha sounds appearing after that are produced
by sound.
It is limited in existence ; i. e. it is not all-pervading, as
v?e have proved already.
li is brought about by homogeneous and heterogeneous
causes. For instance, th« sound produced by sound is brought
about by an homogenous cause ; while that which is produced
by conjunctions and disjunctions is brought by heterogeneous
causes.
It id of two kinds—(1) in the form of letters and (#) in
the form of noise in general &c, &c. The manner of the production of sound of the former class is' desaribed :—From the
contact of the soul and mind, as influenced by the remembrance
of the letter-sounds heard before, there arises a desire to pronounce a letter-sound similar to that sound ; then follows the
effort on the part of the man; and by the instrumentality of this
effort (which serves as the instrumental cause) as affecting the
contact of the soul and air (which contact serves as the nonmaterial cause,) there is produced a certain action or motion in
the Air within the stomach ; and this Air moving upwards strikes
such sound-producing points in the body as the heart, the
throat, the palate and fche like; then by the instrumentaliy of
the contact of the A.ir with these points, as affecting bhfycontact
of Akaca with the points (whicH serves as th« non-material
cause), the»** is produced the letter-sound.
The souad that is not in the form of letters is produced in
the following manner: When the itick strikes the drum, the
force of the stroke affecting the contact of the drum and Alcana,
the sound is produced from this contact; and in thisthe contact

PRACASTAPÄDA BHÄSHTA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (10.)

615

of th« drum and Äkä?a serves as the Don-material cause, and thedrum-sfcick-contact \nd the force of the stick serve as the
instrumental'cause. Sound is also produced by the splitting of
bamboo joints, and also by the disjunction of the Akdca and the
bamboo^
Souad ia produced by sound in the following manner : When
a sound is prodnced by Conjunctions and Disjunctions, in the
aforesaid manner, there appears a regular series of sound-waves
aa it were; that is to Say, just as a ripple of water gives rise to
another ripple in immediate contact with itself, and so on and on*
there appears a regular series of ripples,—so also in the same
manner when one sound has been produced iö produces another
sound in close contact with itself; and so on and on a regular
continuous series of sound-ripples is produced; aud when the line
of ripples reaches the ear, the last unit of the series reaching it?,,
comes to be perceived by it.
..
[ There fa an obvious Interpolation in the reading here, all the worda from tato"
up to bdhiriti have no connection with the present context. J
Question:-—" How do you prove this theory of youra 1"
Amswer :—As & matter of fact, we find that the ear" does
not go up to the place where the sound is produced; nor does the
sound produced in one place go up to the Ear; as both of thesa
are immobile things; and yet there can be no perception by th«
Ear of that which is noc reached by it; as we have shown above
that the organs of perception can operate over objects only
when they actually get at them ; nor could we explain the perceptioL of sound ia auy other manner; and in the case of wave8
we actually find that though the first ripple is itself destroyed,
il produces another in close proximity to itself, and so on and on
producing a regular series of waves, it finally reaches a distant
point; and from this analogy we assume a similar series of sound
waves. Nor would there be any regressv,8 ad intinitum in thi3
case; as the aound-wavea would continue only §o far as they
could be carried by the air of the stomach set in motion by the
sound-producing effort. It ia for this reason chat when a sound

6]Q

QUALITIES: SIMILARITIES AND DISSIMILARITIES.

is produced againsb the direction of the wind, it is not heard very
far ; the reason for this being tha\; the Air proceeding from the
mouth is opposed and stoppedlby the contrary wind.
This theory has been fully discusied by the Rationalists;
hence ail th«b we have done here is tio explain the sense of the
Bhdshya, and hare not put forward any further arguments.
May'this treatise on Qualities (strung to a string), produced
out of reasonings (the pearl-producing shell) and bright-be born
in the heart (worn over the chett), like a necklace of pearls ?
Thus ends* th© chapter on (Qualities.
CHAPTER XI.
ON ACTIONS.
Text (138) * Throtving upivards and the other four
are all related (belong) to the genus ' Action'
(M-7).
They belong to a single sulstance (at a time) (l-i-\*1);
they are momentary (Il-ii-25); they reside only in
corporeal substances (/Z-i-21) ; are without,
qualities (J-i-17); are produced by gravity,
fluidity, effort and conjunction (i-i-29); are
counteracted by conjunction produced by
themselves (/-i-14); are the independent causes
of conjunctions and disjunctions (1-i-17, 20, 30) ;
they serve only as non-material causes (JT-u-3) ;
are productive of effects inhering in their own
substrates as well a*, in the substrates of others ;
they never produce effects of the same kind as
themselves fi-i-11, 25, 31 j ; they are not productive of substances //-i-21,12, 31); they belong to
distinct well-defined classes. The distinctive

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSBYA--CHAP. VI. SECTION (11)

Q\l

feature of each of the five kinds of Actions, consists in the direction in which its effect is produced.
Commentary.
Salutatioafcothe Wearer of the Mooa-cresceat on His Head!
He who is the seed of the worldly tree, the Bridge in the Ocean
of metempsychosis, the Moon pouring out the nectar of true
knowledge !
The author now proceeds to describe the points of similarity
among the five kinds of 4cti°n> aaa* a^so those points by which
these »re distinguishable from other categories of thought.
There is a certain genus by the name of * Action'; and it is
only throwing, upwards and the other four that belong to this
genus.
They belong to a single substance—L e., in any one substance at oue time there is only one action, and one single
action exists in only one substance at a time. If in any one
substance-two different and contrary actions existed at one
and the same time, then, in as much they would counteract
each other, none of them could produce conjunctions aud
disjunctions in any deßnite direction; and as such they would fail
to fulfil one of the necessary qualifications of ' Action'—viz the
character of being the independent cause of conjunctions and
disjunctions. If the two actions inhering in the same substance
were not mutually contradictory, then as any one of the two
would be enough to explain the particular conjunction and
disjunction iu a definite direction, there would be no need for
admitting the existence of the other.
Similarly, one and the same action can not exist in more
than one substance ; because as a matter of fact, we find that
when an action makes one subsUuce move in a definite direction,
it does uot set into motiou auy other substance.
Actions are momentary—i. e., quickly destructible.
April-June 1914.

Vol. XXXVI.

~

618

ACTION.

They exist in eorporeal substances—i. e.t only in sach
substances as ba ve limited dimensions
They are conn*
ter acted or destroyed by the conjunctions produced by themselves
—and not; by the Disjunctions ; as if they were destroyed by
the disjunctions, then we could nofi have another contact
following after that disjunction. They are the independent
cause of conjunctions and disjunctions,—in producing Spevd,
Action stands in need of the help of particular propulsions and
strokes; but sot so in. the production of conjunction» and
disjunctions.
They serve only as non-material causes—and »ot, like
Qualities, as intsrumental causes also-.
Page 291.] They are productive of effects—m the shape
of Conjunctions and Disjunctions—pervading over their own
subs orates, as also over tue substrates of others. They never
produee effects of the same J&nd as themselves; if on<? action
were to produce another action like itself, then- when one
•nan would move, there would be no stopping for him,—one
motion giving rise to aaother motion ad infinitum.
It might be argued that the motion would cease by the
cessation of his desire to move and that of the effort put
forth by him. Bat in that case this desire and effort, and not
the Action, would be regarded as the cause of the subsequent
motions ; and in support of this we have the argument—* oneAction cannot be- the cause of another action,—because it is an*
action—like the ultimate Action ;' or, ' The action in question
is BO* producible % action;,—because it is an action,—like the
first action/
They are not productive of substances ;.~as a substance r&
produced only after the Action has been stopped by the subsequent Conjunction produced by it.
Each of the five—Throwing upwards &e.—belong to
distinct well-defined classes, like ' utksepana' and the like.

PKAgASTAPÄD/V BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION" (11.) 619
Ali the above constitute tbe points of similarity among
the ßve Actions; and what distinguishes each of these from
the others is the direction towards which its effects tend. This
the author proceeds to describe in the following texts:
Text (139): As regards the action of throwing upward, it
is that action which brings about the conjunction
t>f the parts of the body and things in contact with
these parts, with points of space above them, and
also the disjunction of these from those below
them ; this action is produced by Gravity, Effort
and Conjunctions. (I-ii-7).
Commentary.
Throwing upward brings about the conjunction of tne hand
&c., and the stick held by it, with points of space above them.
Texfc (140): That action tohich brings about conjunctions and disjunctions in directions other than
those just mentioned, is Throwing Downward.
(l-ii-9).
Commentary.
Throwing Downward brings about conjunction with lower
things and Disjunction from lower things.
Text (HI): Ahunhava or Contraction is that action by
which a straight object becomes curved by reason
of its particles at one end becoming disjoined
from their original position and coming in contact uith the points of space occupied by the parv
tides at'the other end. (J-w-7).
Page 292 Text (142): Prasdrana or Expansion is that
action wheteby the object becomes straightened

620

ACTION,
by reason of the bringing about of conjunction
and disjunctions in directions opposed to the
aforesaid. (I-ii-7)
Commentary.

That is to say, disjunctions from the points of space occupied by the root-end and conjunction with those occupied
by the top-end.
,Text (143); Gamana or Going i$ that actionwhich bring*
about conjunctions and disjunctions with points
of space in diverse directions.
AU thesefivehinds of Action appear in connection with
parts of the body and things in contact with it,
and is i conscious' as well as 'unconscious.' Any
other action that appears in the aforesaid things
and also in of her things, without conaciousness
(on the part of any person), is only a form of
1
Going".
Objection : " It is not right to divide Actions into five
classes; because they are all of the form of
* Going \ Every momentary action appearing
in the form of * Going ' brings about the conjunctions and disjunctions of its substrate with even
the minutest points of space either above, below
or on one side of it; and every such action is
equally regarded as'Going*; and all actions
are only in the form of Going'*
Reply: It is not so; as we are distinctly conscious of
each class of actions as inclusive of the like and
exclusive of the unlike actions ; for instance, we
have such ideas as that * here we have the action
of Throwing Upwards, and there of Throwing
Downwards'; and iti% on the1 basis of .these

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VT. SECTION (11).

fäl

notions that tue become cognisant of the various
classes and subclasses of A ction. Then again,
the presence of the particular prefixes ' ut' and
the rest distinctly indicates that each of them
produces effects in distinct directions ; and thus
also is established the distinct characterestic genus
of each set of actions.
Objection: " Then too it is not quite correct to say that
"there art only five kinds of action ; as in regard
" to such, actions * entering ' * coming out' and
"the like also, we have exclusive and inclusive
"notions with reference to each set of them,
" Hence if in the case of ' Throwing Upwards '
" and the rest mentioned by you we have to
" admit of distinct classes by reason by our
"having inclusive and exclusive notions with
" regard to each set of them, then, for the same
" reason, we may have such distinct classes as
u
* coming out \ ( entering ' and the like also.
" / / might be argued that in the case of Throwing
"Upward &c, the notions of exclusion and
'* inclusion are due to the fact of their producing
" distinct effects. But then, in the case of ' enter" ing' and ' coming out' also, we may attribute
" like notions to the same cause. And when the
" notions of exclusion and inclusion are found
" to be present equally in both cases, we find no
" special reasons whereby we might admit die" tinct classes in regard to * Throwing Upwards'
u
&c, and not in regatd to l coming out' Sec, "
Reply: Not BO ; as any such distinction as you propose
would give rise to a cross-diversion of classes.
That is to say, if on the mere ground of exclusive
and inclusive notions we were to regard

C)2'2

ACTION.
* coming out' and the rest to be distinct classes,
then we would have a cross-division or inter,
mixture of classes. For instance; when two men
are looking at a man ' coming ovt' from one
room and ' entering' the other, thv two men simultaneously have the notions of the actions,
' Coming out' and ' eatering ',—one of them,
having the notion ' he^ comes in or enters , and
the other the notion ' he goes out'; but if the two
men are lehind a curtain, and on the removal of
the curtain they find that the man is not in the
room where he was before, but in another room,
then they have no notion either of ' coming out'
or of ' entering'; the only idea that they have is
that of^ the man having ' gone ' form one to the
other—a nodon of 'going' only. Similarly,
when the leaf of the bamboo falls in a whirlpool of water, and many men are looking on it,
then it so happens that at ove and the same time
they have the notions of 'whirling', 'jailing
and ' entering *; hence if these were regarded as
distinct classes, we would have a ' mixture' of
classes (a cross-division).
In regard to 'throwing upward' &c, on the other hand
wefi.nd no intermixture of notions. And it is
for this reason that we regard thac latter cnly
as forming distinct classes, and thereby giving
rise to notions of exclusion and inclusion ; while
as regards 'Coming out' &c, these notions are
regarded as being due to the dintinct effects pro»
duced by them.
Question; " How can there be distinct notions at one
and the same time (with regard to the same object) ?
That is to 8ayf if you hold that in the case of

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. Vi. SECTION (II).

623

f

throwing upward ' <£c., just as we have no c/000divi8ion, so too we have no inclusion of many
actions,—then we ask how, with regard to
and the same action (the falling of the leave» in
the whirl-pool), - people could have such distinct
notions as those of 'whirling' 'falling* and
* entering' ? "
To the above we make the following reply: What you
say is not quite correct; a» the different actions
are due to the difference in the conjunctions
and disjunctions of the ivhole object and its
parts, with distinct points in space.
[Page 294]. That is to say the person, who will he
looking on the object and will perceive the
gradually Appearing and disappearing conjunctions and disjunctions 0/ its parts on several
sides of it with the points of space, will have
the notion of ' whirling' with regard to it; while
one who observes only the disjunction of the
object as a whole from the points of space above,
and its conjunction with those below it, will
have the notion of ' falling' with regard to it;
while lastly he who observes its conjunction with
the inner part of the whirlpool, and its disjunction from the outer parts, will have the notion of
' entering.1 And thus it id established that
the distinct notions that we have with regard to
* Coming out' «fee, are due to the difference in
the effects produced by them. Hence it is that we.
regard the distinct notiona-with regard to * throwing upwards ' &c, to be due to distinct * classes ',
while those with regard to * Gaming out' and the
like to be due to the difference of these effects.

624

ACTION.

Commentary.
" Cooscious " action is that which is preceded by a certain
effort on the part of one to whom the action belongs; and
'unconscious' action is that which is not preceded by any such
effort. In such substances as the parts of the body and the
stick &c, in contact therewith, or in substances other thao^hese,
whatever action appears, which is not preceded by any effort
or consciousness on the part of any person, has to be regarded
as a form of ' going.'
An objection is raised : " You have declared that there are
five classes of Actions, in the form of 'Throwing upward1 and
the rest; but this is not right, as all these actions do not in
any way differ from ' going.' To explain further,—In regard
to ' Throwing upward ' we have the notion of the thing going
up, and in the case of' Throwing downwards' that of its going
down; and so on', which leads us to conclude that all these are
only different forms of ' Going ?"
~
Reply: What you say is not right; as we are distinctly
conscious &c, &c. That is to say, in the case of the cow, we find
that we have a notion inclusive of all cows, and also a notion
exclusive of all other animals, the horse &c.; and this leads us
to assume the class ' Cow ;' and in the same manner, in regard
to ' throwing upwards, * also we have an inclusive notion with
regard to such actions, and another notion exclusive of all other
kinds of action, and as such we are fully justifying in assuming
the class*. Throwing upward.' This is easy to understand.
Then the author proceeds to show that there is, in the
case of these five classes of actions, a difference of their charactertisic marks also. [The word ' api * is to be construed next to
the word * karyärambhät.'] The word ' upalakshana' is here
used in the sense of that which markes the individual; and this
mark is the one that is imprinted by the class to which the individual belongs. What the author means is that in regard to the
actions in question we have not only distinct exclusive and

PKAQASTAPÄDA BHÄ3HYA—CHAP TL SECTION (11).

625

inclusive notions aa establishing distinct classes, but also a
difference in the effects produced by each dass of these actions,
—these effects being in the form of conjunctions and disjunctions
wifch different points in space, as expressed by the prefixes ' ut'
&c. Some people explain the word ' v/palahmna,1 in the
present passage as meaning * aignincation'; the meaning
in this case being, that the words * uthsepcma? ' avaksepana* &c, have distinct significations; and as such each one
of these must be regarded as distinct}. If ail of these were
identical then * Throwing Downward* also would, like
'Throwing upward/ be the cause of conjunctions and
disjunctions with points of «pace above (and this is not
really the case.)
Page 295]. Another objection is raised : " If in the case
of ' Throwing upward' &c., distinct classes are accepted on
account of our having inclusive and exclusive notions with regard
to them« then, in as much as we have such notions with regard to
such actions as ' Coming out/ ' Entering' and the like, we must
regard these latter also as constituting distinct classes; and
in that case, the restriction of the number of Action-classes
to five only would not be right If the difference of our
notions with regard to the lauter set of actions be regarded
as due to the difference in the effects produced by them,
then the same may be said to be the case with * Throwing
upward' and the rest also.
Reply: If we regard * coming out' &&, as distinct
classes then we shall have a ''Cross-Division' ; i. e., the anomaly
of one and the same action belonging to various mutually
contradictory classes.
This the author proceeds to
explain further—la a case where a man goes out of one room
into the other, with regard to this same man and the same
action, the man in the room from which he has gone has the
notion of his 'going gut/ while another man in the room
wherein he goes has the notion of his * coming in/ And if

626

ACTIOtf.

these notions of' coming in' and * going out * were due to distinct
classes, then we would have the absurdity of one and the same
action (the * going * of the man) being included in two such
contraditory classes as 'Coming in* and * Going out.' But
when the two observers are behind a curtain, and on the
curtain being removed they find that the man is not in the
room where he was before, the only idea thaü they have is that
of his having * gone,' and not that of * coming in * or ' going
out/ Hence we conclude that the action in question is a form
of * going' only; and as for the differenca in the idea
that we have, this must be regarded as due to the difference in
the attendant circumstances (the effects produced, and so forth),
Another instance is cited—that of the whirlpool.
The following question is raised—"How could there be notions
of many actions with regard to one and the same substance,—
when in any one substance, there cannot be more than one action,
at one and. the same time ?'
And in answer tö this the Author says—The different
notions etc. This is easily understood. When the actions of
the component parts are found to bring about conjunctions and
disjunctions of the sides of the object, we have the notion
of ' whirling '; and the difference in the effects produced
in regard to the object as a whole, gives rise to the notions of
* falling* and ' entering ?
Page 296J Text (144) : Question : " Is ihe class * going '
identical vjlth the class ' Action/ ? orf is it a
distirict class " ?
Wherefore does this question arise in your mind ?
" In regard to all such actions as Throwing Upward*
u
and the like we have the idea of'going* or 'motion
"in the same way as we have that of *Action'; and
" from this it stems that the two are identical;
" and in as much as we final' going * or ' motion'
" mentioned »eparately, just Like ' Throwing

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (U).

627

" Upwards* and the like, it seems as if it formed
" a distinct class by itself"
Answer; It is not so ; because ' motion' is synonymous
with ' Action* Just as the classes * Atmd' and
1
P&ruska ' are identical so are atsa < motiw and
' Action.*
Question : In that case, why has * motion' been mentioned
separately 1"
Answer; That mention is not Useless; as it serves the purpose vf including such actions as 'walking* and the
rest That is to say the name ' going' or motion
is separately mentioned for the purpose of including such actions * walking' 'falling* 'flowing* and
the like, which are not included in l Throwing
Upwardy and the others that are mentioned. If it
were not thus, then only the four actions mentioned specifically toould have to be regarded as
the objectives of those special names as well as of
the general name (' Action *).
Or, we may regard ' going ' as a distinct xcl(Z69 by itself
including only such actions as * walking * and the
like, waick are the causes of conjunctions, and
disjunctions of diverse points of space* Then as
for the application of the word Agoing* ta
* Throwing Upwards' &c^ this must be regarded
as secondary or indirect (or figurative),—being
due to the fact of the character of being the cause
of the conjunctions and disjunctions of their
substrates being common among them.
Commentary.
The question having been put, fche Siddhänti argues that
the question is not reasonable, and then the opponent explains
why the question arises:—" We have the notion of * going' with
11
regard to aü such action» as * Throwing Upwards* and the like

623

ACTION,

"out account; of all these consisting of some kind of motion^—. \
" for instance,'in regard to Throwing* upward' we have the notion I
u
th\8 goes up,' 'this goes to the top ; ; and with regard to :
'• throwing downward/ the notion ' this goes dovm,' this goes to
*• the bottom/ and so forth ; and from this it would seem that the
'*" action of * going * is synonymous with the class 'Action';
'• a*r itr includes all the various kinds of Action. On the other
" hand, we find going also mentioned as a specific form of
"action, jus* like ' throwing upward ' and the rest; and from
" this it would seem thafc it'forms a class distinct from ' Action '
"as it is mentioned along with the sub-classes of Action."
The opponent having thus justified his question, the Sage
replies—No such doubt should be entertained ; as * going' is
synonymous with * Action/ That is to say, just as the class
* 3Pttrttsha *" is synonymous with the class ' iftmä/ on account of
its- including all particular ätmäs, so, in the same manner, 'Going'
is synonymous with Action.
Question: "If 'going 1 is synonymous with 'Action/ then
why should the author have mentioned 'Going 7 separately,
ax?» particular form of Action ? "
Answer ; Ja as much as * walking ' &c, are not included
in any of the four, ' throwing upwards/ &c., they could not
be classed under ' Action/ if ' Going' were not mentioned as a
particular form of it ; and in that case the name ' Action ' would
apply to-those four only. As a matter of fact however f walking '
<&G. are also usually known as (actions '; and hence it is with a
view to include these that the author has mentioned ' Going/
Or, we may regard ' Going * as a distinct class; and as
regards the question as to what'actions are included under this
class, the author says thaü ifc applies to•' walking &c/ which
are the causes of conjunction« and disjunctions &c., &c.
Question :" How is it then that? we have the notion
of going with regard to ' throwing upwards ' &c. *

PARQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (11)

629

Answer : Tbe application of the word * Going ' to these
must, be regarded as secondary or figurative ; and the
ground of this secondary application lies in the fact that
' Going * brings about the conjunctions and disjunctions of
its own substrate, exactly in the same manner as ' throwing
upwards' and tbe other three do with regard to their own. It
is on account of this similarity that the word ' going ' is applied
indirectly to those Actions.
Question : " On the strength of this similarity, why
«re the names * throwing upwards' &c., not applied to
* Going' ?" In answer to this we ask—how is it that,
. in tbe case of the initiated Boy and Fire, the similarity of
yellowness and redness does not lead to the name * Boy'
being applied to the Fire? In answer to this you might urge
that,—' We cannot assume indirect significations on the
ground of causes; it is only when we have an indirect signification which we cannot otherwise account for, that we can
assume or fiud out causes fur such usage or signification."
Exactly the same arguments would serve our purposes also.

Text (145}: We proceed to explain the process of
'conscious' Action:—When one wishes to perform such acts as sacrifices, study, giving, landcultivation and the lik$,—if he wishes to 'throw
up' his hands vr ' throw it down ' then there
arises «n effort in the soul occupying the regions
of the hand; and the ' contact of the soul and
the hand' aided by that effort and gravityt
produces an action (motion) in the hand;
and similarly in the case of the other limbs of
the body, the leg <*c, {V-i-1),
Question : " Row is it with regard to the" things connected vrith the hand &cl"

630

ACTION.
li
Answer : Taking up the stich, the man has the desire
to * throw it up' by means of the hand ; then •.•*
follows an effort on his part ; and when this
effort influences the contact of the soul
with the hand, there appears in the hand the
action of being ' thrown up' or raised ; and
simultaneously with this, there arises a like
action in the stick, following from the contact
of the hand and the stick, as affected by the said
effort ( V-i-1, 2).
Then again, when the stick has been thrown up to a
a certain, point, the desire for throwing it up disap*
pears; andthere appears a desire to 'bring it down*;
this is followed by an effort which, affecting the
aforesaid contact, brings about the simultaneous
bringing down of the hand and the stich; and
the last of the series of downward motions, of}
the stick brings about the particular hind of conjunction, called ' abhighata', 'thumping9 (or
'striking'), of the stick with the mortar; this
conjunction influenced by the momentum set
up in the stick produces in this latter an * unconscious ' action in the shape of an upward
rebound. (V-i-3).
This last action and the aforesaid thumping set up in the
stick a certain faculty or momentum ; and by the
help of this faculty, the contact of the hand with the
stick produces in the hand a\so an * unconscions*
action in the form of the upward rebound.
Even though the previous faculty (of the stick)
is destroyed, (by the thumping) yet the contact
of the stick and the mortar, being capable of
producing a forcible action, becomes capable
of producing and other faculty, by reason of the
peculiar character of the contact. ( K-i-4, 6).

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (13.)

631

Or, it may be that the previous faculty itself being
forcible, continues to exist, not being wholly
destroyed by the thumping. And hence when
an object has a faculty 'present in it already
there is no other faculty produced in the same;
hence at ike time when the thumping aided by
the faculty produces in the stick the 'unconscious'
action of the upward rebouned, that same faculty
helps the hand-stick contact to produce in the
hand also the unconscious' action of the upward
rebound. ( V-i- 3 to 5).
Commentary.
The author means to say that he is now going to describe
the process of conscious* action,—i. e.,sucb action as is preceded
by ah effort on the part of the human agent
Being asked as to how it is, he proceeds to explain. When
one wishes to perform any such action as a sacrifice and the
like; when he wishes to raise bis hand, then there arias, in
that part of the soul which occupies the regions of the hand,
an effort; and by the instrumentality of this effort, the handsoul contact acts as the nonmaterial cause in bringing
about an action in the hand. Even though there were an
effort, if the object in question had no gravity, any raising
or bringing down of it would be absolutely impossible; hence
gravity also is mentioned as one of the causes.
So also in the case of other limbs &c. A a action of the feet is
produced by the instrumentally of. the effort of the soul
occupying the regious of the feet; and the non material cause
of this is the contact of the feet aud the soul The same may
be said with regard to the production of action in other limbs
of the body. In the production of an action of the body also,
the body-soul contact tn the nonmaterial cause, and the effort
produced in the soul occupying the regions of the body the
instrumental cause.

632

ACTION.

Quetdton ; *• How is acfciou produced in thiug* cou&ected
with the limbs of the body 9"
Answer: Taking hold of the stick, when the man has
the desire to raise it with his hand, this desire for the
simultaneously raising of the hand and the stick produces
an effort which is peculiarly fitted for bringing about the joint
raising; and oy the instrumentality of this peculiar effort, the.
hand-soul contact server as the nonmaterial cause to bring about
the raising of the hand ; and simultaneously with this, by the
instrumentality of tin same effort, a similar action is produced
in the stick also, by the hand-stick contact as the nonmaterial
cause; the simultaneity of the two actions being due to the
simultaneity in the operation of their causes.
Thud then when the stick has been raised to a certain
point, the d«sire for raising it ceases ; and there appears
a desire for bringing it down ; this is followed by an effort;
which, like the effort in the case of raising, appears endowed
with a double force ; and by the instrumentalty of this peculiar effort, the hand-soal contact and the hand-stick contact
serves as the nOttmaterial causes in bringing about the bringing
down of the hand, and that of the stick respectively. And the
final action of the stick thus brought down in this case brings
about the conjunction of the stick with the mortar—-this
conjunction being called 'abhighäta* or * thumping ;' and this
thumping produces an .' unconscious' action in the stick, in
the shape of an ' upward rebound / by the instrumentality of
the momentum imparted to the stick ; and thus of this ' upward
rebound' the momentum is the instrumental» and the stick
the material, cause.
This action of the upward rebounding, through the
thumping, produces in the stick a certain faculty, in the form
of a force or momentum ; and by the instrumentality of this
force, the hand-stick contact serves as the nonmaterial cause
in the bringing about in the band also the action of upward

PARgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CÖArP. VI. SECTION (11).

633

relxHind, which 18 ' uncouscious'—i. *., oo<t produced by any
effort oo the part of the human agent.
ObjectioPs: lt The faculty that was produced in the stick
by the action of bringing it down is destroyed by the thumping-—
i. *. by its striking the mortar ; and in the absence of this
faculty, how can the unconscious rebound of tha stick
produce any such faculty or force as has been described ? There
would be no au&illiary cause available."
Answer: Though the previous f&öwlty is destroyed, the
stick-mortar contact is capable of bringing about a * forcible
action *—i. e. an action capable of producing a faculty ; and
this is by reason of the peculiar nature of the contact.
[Page 300» Question: " What if it is so ? "
Answer: That contact becomes1 capable öf helping in
the production of the faculty in question. In accordance with
thra view, the rebounding ot the haäd and the stick would
come one after the other, and Hot simultaneously; and the
notiön of simultaneity would be due to the" ODe following very
ao<Jtt after the other.
Another explanation is given : The previous faculty
itself may be regarded as strong euougn not to be destroyed
fry the thumping; that i*, because of its having beea
brought about by peculiarly forcible causes, the faculty in the
stick would nut l>e destroyed by its coming into contact with a
tangible object (in the shape of the mortar , and thus the
previous faculty in the stick, which is already possessed of
this faculty, being not destroyed; no other faculty is produced.
At the time that the facul'y helps the thumping to produce
the uncousciuus action of upward rebound in* the stick, there
is also produced the unconscious upward rebound of the hand, by
the instrumentality of the same faculty helping the hand-stick
contact In accotdauce with this view there would bean actual
simultaneity between the r&buunds of the hand and that
of th'e'.sr.ic k.
—_
-

634

ACTION.
Text (146): We now proceed to explain the process
of Motion in the case of things shot by the hand:.
When there arises in man a desire to take hold of the
mace by his hajtd and hurl it, this is followed by
an effort on his part; und by the instrumentality of this effort, ffom the aforesaid two
contacts there arises stimultaneously in the hand
and in the mace, the action of ' contraction '
OT ' drawing \ ( V-i 1,2).
When the arm is extended again, the effort put jorth
towards the contraction ceases. After this there
arises in the man a desire to throw the mace
either horizontally or vertically, to a distance
great or small; this is followed by an effort in
accordance with this desire; and by the instrumentality of this effort, is brought about the
hand-mace contact which is called ' nodana * or
impulsion; and this *nodava* brings about
an jetton in the mace, in the form of * impulsion' (V.i-9,10).
This impulsion produces in the mace a certain faculty ;
and from these two. Impulsion and Faculty, a
number of actions go on being produced until
the mace is released from the hand. When this
release makes the impulsion cease, and the
faculty continues to produce a number of actions
tending either upward or adant, near or far,—
according to the nature of the effort put forth
by the person,— until the mace falls on the
ground (V-i-17, IS).

Commentary.
Ptge3Ol3. The question having been put as to the
manner in which action is produced in things *hot by the hand,
the author goes on to explain the process. The1 action of drawing'

BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (11).

635

appears, as without such withdrawing or contraction of the
arm, there can be no throwing. The effort puc forth in the
drawing ia of the arm and the mace ceases by reason of the
appearance of another effort tending towards the contrary
action of expanding. After the expansion, as the mau wishes
to throw the mace either upwards or aslant, to * great distance
or to a point near at hand, so is also the effort put out by
him. That is to say,, if he wishes to show it aslant, he puts forth
an effort to that end ; if he wishes to throw up, he puts forth
an effort tending to that; if he wishes to throw tfc to a great
distance, he puts forth a great effort ; and if he wishes to throw
it to a point near at hand, the effort be puts forth is comparatively weaker. This is what is meant by the word ' anurüpa '
The contact of the hand with the man is called
' nodana * because it is the cause of the simultaneous moving of
the hand and the mace« From this * nodana * or Impulsion,
as aided by the aforesaid effort put forth in accordance with
the man's desire, there arises an action in the mace, and this
action, through the impulsion, produces a faculty ; and until the
mace falb down, there continues to be produced a series of
actions, hy the farce of and in accordance with this faculty.
Texfc (147): We proceed to explain the process of Motion
in the case of object» shot from certain instruments
The man who is- strong and has taken physical
exercise, tuhes up the bow with his left hand; then
taking with his right hand the arrow and applying
it to the stri-tg of the bow, catches hold with his
fingtrs the arrow along with the string,—and then
there arises in his mind a desire to draw the
bow along with the string and the arrow ; this is
followed by an. effort on hispart; and by theinstrumentality of this effort, the hand-soul contact
brings about in the. hand the action oj' drawing;

ACTION.
and at the same time, by the instrumentality
of. the same effort, the hand-arrotv-string contact
brings about an action in the string and also
in the arrow ; and simultaneously iviththis again,
by the instrumentality of ihe hand-arrow-string
contact a3 quahfied by the said effort, the contact
of the, strivga with the two ends of the bow,
produce» two actions in the tivo ends of the bow.
Thus the bow being drawn as for as the ear,
there appears in the mind of the person the idea
that it cannot be drawn further ; and this idea
destroys the effort that had been put forth for
the purpose of drawing the bow. Then then
folloius a desire for releasing the bow; this is
followed by another effort on the part of the
person ; and by the instrumentality of this
effort, the soul-finger contact produces an action
in the finger, which brings about a disjunction
of the string from ihe fingers ;from this disjunction
fallows
the destruction of their
contact; this contact having heen destroyed,
as there, is no longer any obstruction to the operation of the elasticity of the bow, which now
makes the circular bow revert to its original
condition; and by the instrumentality of this
force of €laatieity, the bow-string contact produces
an action in the string and in the arrow. This
action, by the instrumentality of its own cause,
produces a faculty in the string; and by the
instrumentality of this faculty, the arrow-string
oontacA brings about an ( impulsion'; and thence
the first action in the arrow\ by the instrument"
ality of thi» impulsion, produces a faculty or
force in the arrow. From this faculty as helped
by the impulsion, follows a series of motions which

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP VI. SECTION (11). &£%
continue to appear until thz arrow becomes disjoined from the arrow. This disjunction having
put a stop to the impulsion, the further series of
actions (motions) of the arroto is due to the
faculty or Joics (momentum) imparted to it;
and these motions continue until the arrow falls
on the ground.
Question : " How is it that so many motions appear, one
after the other?'
Answer: It is due to the fact of there being many conjunctions. In the interim (between the impul~
sion and the tailing on the ground) there is a
single faculty (momentum) produced ; as the
action (productive of the faculty) is not accom»
pained by its auxilliaries. (V-i~l, £, 17, 18, 18)
%
Commentary.
A man who has performed regular exercise with the bow
takes up the bow in his firm grasp; and having applied tha
arrow to it &c......
and then a desire appears in him in the
form :—'May I draw this bow along with the string and the
arrow/.....
All these actions, in the arrow &c, ar«
simultaneous, because of the simultaneity of the operation of
their causes. When the bow has beeu drawn as far as the ear,
the man lias the idea that his hand cannot go any further; and
this idea puts ao end to the effort that he had put forth for the
dmwing of the bow
The disjunctiou of the fingers 1«
from the arrow and the string:—this disjunction puts an end
to the contact of the fingers with the arrow and the string;
... ^
The action produced in the arrow aud the string, by
the instrumentality of its own cause—i e.f through the coutact
of the Uow and the string—produces in the string the faculty
or force of speed or momentum, Through this faculty the
conucb of the arcow with the stv:ug brings about the impulsion
which becomes the cause of the combined u\oticm of the stiing

638

ACTION.

and the arrow. Through this impulsion the first action in the
arrow produces a faculty ; which faculty, aided by she said
impulsion, brings about a series of actions continuing until the
arrow falls down, by reason of the exhaustion of the force that
counteracts the action of gravity.
An objection is raised:—" Beginning from the moment that
the arrow becomes disjoined from the string (till the arrow falls)
there appear many action.«, one after the other; but fiom
whence do you derive this assumption f Why do not you
assume the whole thing to be due to a single action 1"
Reply: I t is a well known fact that an action continues
till the next contact (resulting from it) is brought about. ; and
when the arrow has been shot, we find thai in the interval
(between the leaving of the arrow and its filling on the ground)
many contacts have appeared ; and hence we assume that there
are many actions (which are the direct cause of the contacts).
The faculty produced during the interval is one only ; as
it is only when an action is aided either by impulsion or by
striking, that it produces a faculty, and never by itself alone; as
in mere action there is no speed ; and as a matter of fact we
find that diuing the interval iu question, there is neither impulsion nor striking; and hence the only one faculty produced
is that which . proceeds from the action of the arrow as influenced by the contact of the arrow with the string ; and it is this
peculiarly forcible faculty that continues till the falling of the
arrow; and as the active efficiency of this faculty goes on
diminishing, the consequent actions become weaker and
weaker; and it is thus that we have many actions^ just in the
same manner as the fruits of the young tree go on improving,
while those of tbe old one go on deteriorating.
Text (148) : Thus have we described the 'conscious*
and ' unconscious * actions of things under the
guidance of the soul. In the four external
substances, not guided by the soul, we have only

FAÄCASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VL 8SCTI0K (11)

£39

* uncoTi-C'uWi ' action ; and this, is in the form
of * motion ' pry cieding from impulsion and such
other causes. ' Impulsion' is that particular
kind of conjunction which is brought about by
thi instruments My ofgravity, fluidity\ speed and
effort, functioning eithtr collectively or singly;
(impulsion is a kind of conjuaction, as) it is the
cause of that action which brings about the
non-disjunction (of the impeller from the impelled) ; as ive find in the case of Earth in the shape
of clay* (V-ii-1, IS).
Commentary.
In the case of the four substances not guided by the specific relationship of any particular Soul, the only action possible
is that of ' Motion ' brought about without any effort on the
part of an intelligent being ; and there are no such actions as
'Throwing Upwards* and the rest enumerated above.
Page 304.] It has been declared that in the said four
elements, action is produced by impulsion &c.; and the question
arises—" What is this lmpuUioa ? " The answer is that Impulsion is that particular kind of conjunction which &c, &c.
Question: " How do you know that Impulsion is a kind of
conjunction " ?
Answer : Impulsion is the cause of that action which brings
about the nou-disjunctioo of the impeller from the impelled
(and hence it must be regarded as a Conjunction). That is to
say, it is only by means of tbe Conjunction in the form of
Impulsion, that the impeller impels the impelled ; and it is
for this reason that it is called ' Impulsion ' 'Nodana.'
Question : Where do you find Impulsion to ba the cause
of Action ?,"
* Yathd pakdkhyäyöm prithivyäm appareitly forms part of thil paragraph ;
though it has be«n printed along with the next

640

ACTION.

Answer : We find it in the case of the clayey earth j that
is to say, we find that when a small piece of stone is gently^
put upon a lump of clay, it gradually disappears into the clayey
lump; and in this case the impulsion is in the form of the
conjunction of the stone and the clay, brought about by gravity
(weight of the stone). In a case where the lump of clay is struck
wirh great force from a distance, by the piece of stone, we have
impulsion in the form of Conjunction brought about !>y gravity,
effort and speed. And lastly, when the clay is struck by water,
we have Impulsion in the shape of Conjunction brought about
by all the four causes (gravity, fluidity, effort and speed.)
Text (149) : ' Abhighäta ' or ' Striking ' is that particular kind of conjunction which is produced by
speed, and which is the cause of that action which
brings about disjunction. From this also there
arises action in the four elementary substances.
As fur instance, when *uch things as the stone and
the like fidl upon a solid body When the clayey earth
is impelled and struck by the feet,—the conjunction thatfolloiusfrom'impulsion' and striking'
either singly or conjointly, is of the nature of
' samyuktasamyoga ' (( conjunction with the
conjoined ') ; and this conjunction also produces
actions in the earth Sec. (V-ii-l, 12j.
In those point* in space also that are neither impelled
nor struck, actions are produced. In the case of
earth and water, lühon thd, e is no conjunction,
effort or speed-c^unta ac'in iihe, effects of gravity,
theie is a ' going doicn* of the object, caused bygravity ; as we have described in the cine of the
stUk and the body &c. In the cane ofihese thiwg*
the first action (towards falling) is due IG qiavity,
and the subsequent ones to gravUy undfucu,lty
(produced by the motion). (V-i-7 18; V-ii-Z).

PRAQASTAPAOA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (11.)

641

Commentary.
Page 305.] * Abhighäta' or 'striking* is that conjunction &o., dec. That is to say, that action which brings
about the disjunction of the object striking from the object
struck at has for its cause a certain ' conjunction '; and to this
coajuuetion we give the name of * Abkighäta ' or 'Striking \
and by this also there are produced actions in the four rudimentary elements. As for instance, when the piece of stone &c.t &c.
That Impulsion is the cause of the action that brings about
the mutual nou-disjunction, and not of that which brings about
disjunction—we have already explained; as also that striking
is the cause of that action which brings about mutual disjunction. And the author now proceeds to explain' Sav&yuktasamyoga,' * Uonj unction with the conjoined ': When the clayey &c.
Wheu the earth is impelled by the feet at any one point, then those
other points also that are neither impelled nor struck, are found
to have actions (motions) produced in them (by that impulsion);
and the cause for the production of these actions lies only in
the conjunction of these other points with certain other points
that are in direct contact with the points impelled and struck.
In a case where the striking object having struck the earth,
carries it a little lower, and then turns back upwards,—
the action that is produced in another point of the earth is* due
to a ' conjunction of the conjoined' that is due to both
(Impulsion and Striking).
The author next proceeds to describe how Gravity produces
actions:—In the case af Barth and Water dec That is to say,
in the case of the stick, when there is no hand-contact present
to counteract the effects of gravity, the stick falls down ; and this
falling down is due to gravity ; in the same manner when there
ifr no effort on toe part of the man to hold his body erect—an
effort that would counteract the effects of gravity,—the body
falls; aud so also does the'arrow fall when it has no speed {or
momentum) ; and all this is due to gravity. In these cases

642

ACTION.

however it is only the iirst action towards falling, that is directly
due to gravity; and .as for the rest of the series of actions
ending with the failing,—they are due to the faculty or force
set in motion by that first action; and thus these must be
regarded.as brought about by Gravity and by Faculty ; as each
one of these by itself has been found elsewhere tobe productive
fo actions.
Text (150J:—When water in the form of a current
moves from a certain place downwards, this
action is called • Flowing '; and it is due to
Fluidity.
Question: '• How so ? "
Answer: (Before the water flows) its inherent fluidity
is k6pt in check by its contact all round with
the high earth-banks; and as for the fluidity
of its component particles those chat are in direct
touch (with the banhs)}—that also is kept in check
by the same contact, by reason of its inhering
in the same substrate (with this contact); and
the fluidity of the other particles is checked by
the * contact of the conjoined! 4When however,
there is the slightest breach in the surrounding
embankment, then, though the fluidity of the whole
volume of water is still kept in check on all sides,
and hence it does not become active, (begin to
flaw) yet the fluidity of the particle in direct contact
with the opening becomes active; and this
activity is tranafered groduully to the fluidity
of the other particle» also, as the obstruction goes
on disappearing; there is a gradual moving
of these particles in conjunction with one another,
and the original volume of water having been
destroyed (by the destruction of its eo-heaive

?RA<?48TAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VL SECTION (11).

643

conjunction), the water particles adhering to. one
another produce another, an elonjated substance
(an elov gated volume of water); and in this
fresh substance the quality of fluidity is produced
in accordance with the similar quality in %fd
or ig'mative compone n t pirtides. And thus when
these originative component particles continue to
move in conjunction, there is produced a likt
action in the composite whole also; and to this
action we give the name of ' FlowingJ (v-ii-4).
Commentary.
The author proceeds to explain how fluidity produce»
action:—The moving down or flowing Af water from the upper
to the lower surface of the earth is action produced by fluidity.
Being asked as to how this comes about, the author proceeds
to explain. The water being hemned in on all side» by an
embankment of earth, its inherent fluidity is held in. check ;
and hence there is flowing of the water. As for the fluidity
of the component particles of water, that belonging to the
particles touching the embankments, is checked by reason
of its inhering in the same particles that form the substratum
of thati contact; and that belonging to the other particles is
checked by reason of these partieles being in contact with
particles in direct contact with the embankments; and so on.
When, however, there is a slight breach in the embankment,
though in the begining, there is no flowing activity of the whole
volume of water,—-because its dimensions are large, and it is
hemened in by an embankment of larger dimensions, and a
large volume could not move out,of the small opening in the
banks,—yet the particle of water in proximity to the breach is
enabled to move out by reason of its small volume ; and when
this particle has moved out, it removes the obstacle to, and
makes room for, the functioning of the fluidity of the other
particle». And thus there, is. moving o£ the water particles in

ACTION.
contact with one another ; the. particle near the smbankmeot»
if the first tomov«; then the particle that is close to it; and then
that which is in contact with this latter ; and so on,, all the
particles move on. Though when moving, these particles do not
move from their respective places, yet when they move they
do so in such a manner as to remain in contact with one another.
This is what is meant by their moving in conjunction ; which
does not mean that they have their previous contacts undisturbed; because we find the ape changed. Thus then, the
previous contacts having been destroyed, the substance—the
original volume of water as a whole—becomes destroyed ; and
the particles adhering to one another produce an elongated
substance ; and in this substance fluidity is produced in accordance with the fluidity of its component particles. Thus,'when
the component particles move out io close adherence to one
another, a like action is set in the composite whole, which thus,
by reason of its fluidity, flows out.
And thus we find that when fluidity is produced in the
new volume of water, and the component particles move out in a
continuous line, not deviating from their original position in the
volume, the fluidity of the whole volume produces in it an action
which is called ' Flowing.*
Text (IB1):—Action produced by faculty we have,
already described in the case of the arrow &c.
And similarly, in the case of such things as thepotter's wheel and the like, we find that the
component particles undergoing a series of conjunctions and disjwncti* ns with definite points
of space on its sides, there is produced, in the
wheel as a whole, an action, produced by faculty,
by the instrumentality of conductions and disjunctions with points of space not restricted
to a single place; and this action it what is
tailed l Bhramana; * Revolving/ Such are the
particular forms of ' Going f or ' Motion \

PRAQASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VI. SECTION (11)

645

Commentary«
Th« word ' tathd* stands in need pt a corresponding
' yathd'; hence the construction of the senteuce is—' as in the
case of the arrow, 50 in that of the wheel &c, &c.'
This the author proceeds to explain..
The
conjunctions and disjunctions of the wheel as a whole are
not re8tructed to any particular points of space; as it moves on
all sides. The process is thus :—The contact of the turning
stick produces an action (motion) in the wheel as a whole ;
and the subsequent actions are produced by the faculty thaö
is produced by impulsion, striking, and Actions: and thus
the speed (or momentum) producing the first action in
the wheel-particle in direct contact with the stick, the action
of the other particles is due to their contact with the particle
which is in contact with the stick; aud the subsequent actions
of the former particle are due to the faculty, impulsion
and striking; and those of the others are produced by
faculty, as also by the contact of the particle, which is in
contact with the stick; when the stick is removed, the
continuance of ehe motion is due to faculty only.
The author finally sums tip the various kinds of
* going ' or c Motion \
Page 308] Text 152:—Action is produced in the
Air called 'Breath.' by the "Soul-air contact, by
the instrumentality of efforts originating from
desires und aversions; and tMs we learn from
the fact of the ' breathing' 0/ the waking man
following the bent of his desire, and that in the
sleeping man being due to the instrumentality
of the effort involved in the mere act of * living'
(v-ii-lV).
Akäca, Time, Spate and Boul—ftowjfc havvng the
{AaraeUr of 'substance'—-are devoid of action
(motion;) because like Generality <fc?., these

646

ACTION.

are incorp'sreal. 'Corporeality* implies a nonpervading ijtimited) dimension; &nd action is
concomitant with corporeality ; hence as corporeality 18' ah%ent in Akäga&c.,; they haven»
actions (v-ii-21; II-i-21.)
CommentaryIn the ciise of the different kinds of Breathing—Recaka
&c.,—we find the action, of breathing regulated by the will
of the man ; when dust gets into our nostrils, we breath out)
with a force in order to blow out the dust; this breathing
follows from aversion ; and from these facts we are led to the,
conclusion that breathing is produced by effort.
In the case of the sleeping man, the action of breathing
must l>6 regarded as following- froQ1 the air-soul contact, by
the instrumentality of the effort involved in the mere act of
living; and in proof of this we have the following argument:
The breathing of the sleeping man is a product of effort,—
because it is an action of breathing,—like the breathing of
the waking man. The breaühiDg of the sleeping man could
not be due to desire or aversion ; as these are not present in
the sleeping man ; hence we conclude that it mast be due
to the mere act of' living'; as the act of holding life is doe to
that
A question having been raised as to why nothing has
been said with regard to action (motion) in ÄJcäca, Time,
Space and Soul, as id the four elements (Earth £c),—th*e>
author says :—Action is always accompained by corporeality ;
and as this latter is not present in Akäsca &c„ these could
have no action.

Text (153): Tn the mind that is hi the body, there is an
action, during the waking state of the man, for
bringing about the contact of another organ of

PKAgASTAPÄDA. BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VI. SECTION (11).

647

perception; and this action is brought alout by
the mind-Hotel contact, through, the instrumentality of efforts proceeding from desire» and
aversions; this fact we infer from the fact that
the perception of different objects by the different
organs follows the bent of OUT* wishes. During
the sleeping state, the action of the mind at the
moment of waking is produced through the in*trumentality of effort due -to the mere act of
living., {p-ii-lljj).
The action of 'apamrpana' or *on'-going' and also
that of ' upasarpana' or * Incoming, * of the
mind, proceeds from mind-soul contact, through
the instrumentality of the unseen agencies (of
dbarma and adharma).
Question; * How so?"
Answer: Life has for its auxiliaries dbarma and
adharma; and when these have become exhausted by
actual experience, or when they have been suppressed by each other,—the Life being deprived of its
auxiliaries and also of the effort due to these, the
Breathing becomes stopped; and the mind
becomes separated from the dead body by mindsoul contact, through the instrumentality.. of a
fresh set of dharma and adharma.set into aoiivüy;
and that action of the mind which brings about
this separation is what is Gzlled ' apasarpaaa ' or
'Outgoing' Then the mint* going out of the body
ennes into contact with the truTisportive or etheric
body {of the soul) produced by the s%me dharma
and adharma; and while in this body, it proceeds to heaven or to hell, and there comes into
contact with a body that appears in accordance
with the residual tendencies (of the soul's past

6*8

ACTION.
deeds), and the actions of the mind thai bring about
this last contact is what is called 4 upasarpana'
or " Incoming. * Of this 3ams kind are the, out going
and incoming of the mind of Yogis, which is
thrown out by them and transported for c* time to
any desi red place. Similarly too, the action
of the mind that brings ene into touch with the new
body at the time of action, is also brought about
by the unseen agencies (of dharma and adharma
{v-i -17).
In the same manner those actions that we find appearing
in lk$ rudimentary elements are produced, and for
which we cannot find any cause either by sense-perception or by inferenceyandwhich are yet found.to
be usrful or harmful to us,—must be regarded a*
produced by these uv seen agencies. For instance,
the action in the atoms at the begining of creation,
the upward, mothn of fire, the horizontal motion
of Air, a%id the moving of the dements, the
goi*g of the consecrated stone to the place of the
thief and the attraction of iron by the magnet.
(tr-tt~2,13,12, 17, 7).
Commentary.

In the waking state we find that
we never have any sensuous perception except those that are
in keeping with oar wish ; that is to say, we sse oolour only
when we have the wish that we should perceive colour; and
so on with Taste and other things; and as a matter of fact
we know that the extenal organs of perception have no
perceptive power without the connection and help of the
internal organ; consequently we conclude that the action of
the mind, whereby it comes in contact with the external
organs, proceeds from effort, due 10 certain desires and aversions
of the person.

PABpASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—C$AP. VL SECTION (11)

64$

Fagd 310]* When the man is sleepiog, then at the time
of waking there is an . action iu the miud, for the purpose
of bringtpg about its coatact with other organs; and this
action mast be regarded as proceeding from the mind-soul
contact, through the instrumentality of the effort due to the
aot of living.
'Living' consists in a particular kind of mind-soul
contact; and this contact, in bringing about ita effects, is aided
bj dharma and adharnia ; hence when these two are exhausted
and cease to produce effects, either by reason of all the results
having been duly experienced, or by that of the two haxing
nullified each other,—then, the said coatact becomes deprived
of these suds, and hence also of the efforts due to these aids ;
and then them is & cessation ef the action of breathiug ; the
body falls dead; and at this point of time there are set in to
activity such dharma and adharma as are to have their results
experienced during the coming life; thai is to say, that set
o( dharma and adharmoLwhich did not bring about its results duipg the past life on account of the body of the soul during that
life being framed with a view to the experiencing of the
results of a distinct set of dharma and adharma; but when
these ktter have .become exhausted, theu it is only natural
that the other set- of dharma and adharma should become active
which is to have its results experienced by means of another
body; as now there is nothing to obstruct this activty of the new
set. The mind-soul contact now being aided by this fresh set
of dharma and adharma—which is totally distinct from that
which regulated the experiences of the previous body,—the
mind becomes separated from the dead body ; and the action
of1 ehe mind that brings, about this separation is called "Oatgoing/ Thus theo, in the production of this action
of " out-going/ the mind-soul contact is the non-material cause,
the mind the material cause, and the newly active set of dharma
and adharma the instrumental cause.

650

ACTION.

After this, the mind having gone out of the dead body,
it becomes joined to an etheric body, which is the effect of 1
the same dharma-adharma ; and along with this etheric body
it goes to heaven or to hell, and there becomes joined to bodies
in accordance with t<be residual tendencies of the man's deeds»
That is to say, the body that the soul takes in heaven or in hell
must be connected with his mind ; otherwise there could be no
experiences in those regions ; and as the mind is not omnipresent like fcae sou], it could nod become connected with
these other bodies, without actually going out to them ; t&ea
again, its going to such a distance would not be possible by
itself; as the mind without a body cannot possibly havi any
action except during the state that follows immediately after
Universal Dissolution ; hence it is for this reason that
we assume the existence of a subtile and in perceptible feody
which is close to the dead body, and which is produced from
atoms, upwards, set into motion by the unseen agencies ; and
as this body serves to transport the mind from the dead body
to the regions of heaven or hell &&, it is called the ' transportive *
body. In support of our view we may put forward the following argument.:—
Between death and the next brith, the action of
the mind must be such as is due to its contact with a
body,—because it is an action of the mind other than that
at the point of time immediately after the Great Dissolution,—
like the action of the mind in the body that we see. This
view fa also supported by the scriptures.
Page 311]. The action then that brings about the
contact of the mind with this other body is called ' Upasarpatia'
or * In-coming'; which thus comes to be that action of the
mind whereby it becomes joined to fresh bodies produced
in heaven or. hell
m
Of the yogis <&&>&&..,
Then again, the
action of the mind that brings it into the other body at the

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. VII.

651

nexo birth of the soul, is due to- unseen agencies ; so also
are the, actions of the rudimentary elements «fee, &c.t &c, &c.
Far instance,
„
the "Vibration of tk$
elements—e. g. the motion of the Earth ; when a person is being
examined for theft, a stone over which certain mantras
have been pronounced, actually moves to him (if he it
really tfce thief)
.ail this is due to unseen
agencies,
Fix ia your hearts the great truth that Action is the
cause of the obtaining of the desirable,, and the avoiding of
the undesirably experiences.!!.
CHAPTER VII.
On Sännänya—Community.
Text (154): Community i'* of two kind*—4 higher * and
'lower-*
It pervades over all its objectives*; Tias identically the
fiame form (in all cases) inhering in many tnc£ividuuls; U brwig* about the idea of us own form
in one, two or» many thing»; anditie the cause
or basis of the notion of inclusion, inhering as
it does in all Us substrates simultaneously.
Question; "Howmt*
Answer: It is so because as a matterof-fact wefimd
that when we cognise each individual objects
a» belong simultaneously to a particular class,
and we have sueh cognitions repeatedly, then there
is produced in our minds an impression ; and
when in view of this impression toe review those
past cognitions, we exme to recognise a certain
factor that inheres in every one of the objects
cognised; and it is this factor that constitutes
the Community. (I-ii-3).

655

COMMUNITY.
The Community of ' Being * is the highest; in
as it is the cause of inclusive cognitions
In the case of a number of totally different things
snck, for instance, as pieces of leather, of cloth,
of blanket and so forth,—if all of them ate
possessed of the same quality of * bluenesd/ with
regard to each one of these we have the notion
that' it is Hue'; and in the same manner, in
the ease of the totally different categories, Substance, Quality and Action, we find that with
regard to each one of them we have the notion
that ' it exists;' and this all-inclusive notion
could not but be due to something apart from the
three categories themselves; and this something
is what we called ' Sattä* or 'Being.* And it
j
is by reason of the presence of * being' that we j
have the inclusive notion of a number of things '
as '.existing*; hence this 'Being' cannot but '
be regarded as Community. fI-ii-4, 7 to 10,17).
The Lower Communities are, ike classes of * Substance' ;<
4
Quality * ' Action ' and so forth. As thesö give
rise to inclusive as well as exclusive notions, .
they are regarded as Communities as well as Individualitiea. For instance 'Substance' is a
Community, in as much as it serves as the basis of
an incusive notion with regard to such mutually
different th ngs as earth, water and the like ; and
it is an Individuality in as much as it serves as
the basis of notion exclusive of Qualities and
Actions. Similarlyf Quality' is a Community by
reason of its giving rise to a notion including aU
qualities such as colour and the rest; and it is
an individuality, on account of its serving a*
the basis of a notion exclusive of substances
and actions. In the same manner, ' Action' is

PAR<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄ3BYA-CHAP. TIL

653

a Community by reason of its serving as the basis
of a notion inclusive of all the several dttions of
* Throwing Upwards ' and the roti, and it is
an individuality, in as much as it it tteolusive
of qualities and actions.
In this same manner, in the case of stich Communities
as ' Earth ' * Colour? • Throtving Upwards *
1
Cow* l Jar * * Cloth * and so forth,—which inhere in animate and inanimate beings,-—we find
that they serve as the basis ofinclusiveaswell&setoclusive notions; and as such these also, ate Covnmunities as well as individualities, Buöh classes
however as * SulstanceS * Quality * and 'Action * include many individuals; and as suck
they are primarily regarded as Communities;
and it is only indirectly or secondarily that
they are regarded as Individualities, by reason
of their serving to exclude their substrates from
ofher similar Communities. (I-li-5).
Commentary.
May the High-souled Brahma, Vishnu and li&heswara; the
cau«e8 of the origin the continuance .and destruction of the
universe,—be ever victorious!
The author proceeds to describe Community: It is of two
kinds <fcc.—these we have already explained before in the section
wherein these several categories to be mentioned by name.
Some people hold that all Communities are all-pervading;
and with a view tp deny this view the author proceeds to
explain the nature of Community,
Page 318.] It pervades over all its objectives. When
a certain Community resides in a certain object, this latter
becomes its ' objective'; and over all such objectives it
pervades. That the Community does not exist in all things (its

654

COMMUNITY.

objectives as well as other things) is proved by the simple fact
of its not being perceived to be so.
It has identically the same form—that is to say; the form
in which it resides io one object is the same in which it resides
in another object also ; and that such is the case is proved by
our having exactly the same notion of the Community in both
cases. Then again, the fact of the Community inhering by the
same form in many* objects can be proved by OUE own
experience. Nor can there be any incongruity in this, when it
is distinctly cognised by some means of right knowledge;
in fact we find such things as ' duality ' and the rest inhering
in many objects at one and the sanre time.
It might be argued that if such were the case then there
would be no difference between Duality &c. and Community.
And in order to remove this misconception the author adds,—
It brings about the idea of its own form &ct itc. For
instance, wbether we see a single.'cow, or two cows or many
crows, we have the notion of the u cow " in all cases. Such
however is not the case with Duality &c. (Each of which exist
only in a definite number of objects).
Thus the definition of * Community ' comes*to be tbis :—
That which, while inhering in many objects, brings about the
idea of itselj in one, two or many objects,—is * Community*
This the author proceeds to explain :—And it is the cause or
basis &c., &c. That is to say, as a matter of fact we find that
the fern that is in one object is present in another object
also ; and hence the Community comes to be the cause of the
inclusive notion of the sameness of its form inhering as it does,
in exactly the same form; in a number of objects, simultaneously—i.e., when it subsits in one, it subsists also in the other.
A question having been put as to how it is known that Com*
mnnity inheres in many objects at one and the same time, the
Author explains:— When ive cognise <£c. That is to say, having
cognised the Community AS subsisting in one object, when at

PBAgASTAPÄDA BHÄ8HYA—CHAP VII.

655

some future time, we happen to see another object and find
the same generality in id, recognise it to be the same as the
one cognised in tbe previous object,—then we distinctly
recognise the fact of the Community iniiering in many objects.
And as this is a distinctly perceptible fact, it» sets aside «11
notions to thereontrary.
The author now proceeds to descrbe separately the Higher
aod Lower Communities spoken of above:—The Community of
* Being ' is the highest <&c.t 4cc Even though 4 Beingf ia
distinctly perceived, yet there are some people who deny that
they perceive any such thing ; hence for such people the
author briugs forward an inferential argument;—In the eise
of a number of totally different things <£c., <kc. This is
quite clear; the argument being thus stated formally:—The
inclusive notion tljat * it exists/ which we have with* reference
. to substance &c, must be regarded as based upon the cognition
of something apart from these things themselves,—because
we find a common inclusive idea extending over different
things,—like the notion of 4 blue ' with regard to the leather,
the cloth &c: And as ' Being' serves to bring about only the
inclusive notion of substance &c., and nob any notions of
exclusion, it must be regarded as a Community only, and not
an Individuality.
Page 314.] The Lower Communities are the'classes of
' Substance * &c.f &c. and these are the cause of notions of
inclusion as well a3 exclusion
Question : " Are the classes • substance ' and the rest
then in reality Communities, or individualities, or both ?"
Answer: Svch classes as substance dtc, include many
individualities dtc.t &c. That w to say, the word * Sämänya'
indicates the character of being common ; aud as the classes of
' substance' &c., have this character of being common to. many
individuals, the name ' Sämänya ' or j * Community' applies
to them exactly ; as for the name ' Vigetha' or ' individuality '

COMMUNITY.
however, this could not appij to them exactly; as a Vigkeha is
that which distinguishes ita substrate from all other shiogs
(aod the classes in question do not distinguish any owe of
their substrates from all other things). Fur this reason it ia
only the name ( Community ' that can apply to these classes,
primarily ; and the name * individuality' is applied to them
ouly secondarily orfiguratively,—thisapplication being hased
upon the similarity thai; the class,' substance ' &c, also serve
to distinguish their substrate from the objects of other clause*,—
just as the Vigesha distinguishes its substrate from all other
things.
Text 155:—That these Communities belong to a category
distinct from Substance,. Quality and Acliont is
'proved by the fact of their having a character
totally different from these latter. For this same
reason top they are eternal. These again are
different from one another\ by reason of each of
them residing in a different set of things,—
substances, qualities and actions,—and also by
reason of people having a distinct notion with
regard to each of them.
Each of these is regarded as one in all its substrates,
because its character in all remains the same,
and also because there are no marks of difference.
Though Communities do not have their extension
limited, yet they are regarded as extending ovffr
all their objectives; because of Vie definitely
restricted character of the distinguishing features
of the objects, and also because of the fact of these
objects having definitely distinct causes of their
oxen. As Communities do not exist, either^ by
conjunction or by inherence, in the intervals (of
space between two individuals of the same classes),
they are not spoken of an existing (in those intervals) (I:ii-M to 16).

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VII.

857

Commentary.
Pag6 315.] Objection. " The class * substance$ is nothing distinct from the individual substance ; and hence it is
not proper to describe the functions of the two as if they
were distinct."
In reply to this»the author says—That these Communities
&6,, &c. That is to say, as a matter of fact we find that the
class 'substance' is congnisable by such cognitions as are inclusive
or comprehensive in their character, while the individual
substance is coguised by a cognition that is wholly exclusive in
character ; and . in as much as this constitutes a difference in
their character, the classes cannot but b^ regarded as belong*
ing to a category distinct from that to which the individuals
belong.
For the same reason is the class eternal. That is, in as
much as the class is different from the individual, it must
-^be eternal; if ifc were not so, it would be produced when
the individuals are produced, and destroyed when these are
destroyed (which is not found to mbe the case) ; this
predicament is avoided when the two are regarded as
distinct.
Some people hold the following view t
"The Community serves to bring about a comprehensive
"or inclusive notion of diverse things. Asa matter of facb,
"in the case of each individual thing, it does not bring aboub
" the cognition of two distinct entities,—one in the form of
" Community and another in that of an individuality,-—indepen" dently of each other, as we have in the case of the man and
" the stick ; nor is there any relation of qualification
" possible between the two entities ; as it is not that, when ever
" we see a cow, we have the idea that' fcliis is qualified by,
"or possessed of, the general character of the cnv* \. in fact
** the. cognition that we have is that of the two being identical,

^COMMUNITY.
"ra the form 'this is a cow'; an expression worein the
*c general character of the now is spoken of as identical witk
"the individual cow seen by the eyes; specially as the two
"hav« no forms apart from each other. As for -< inclusiveness',
" this is a character that belongs to the Community of the ' cow\
•" as also to all other Communities4 and as &>r 'exclusivefless'
" this belongs to t&e individual cow, as also to all other
" individual things ^ but thore is no doubt that the form of
"the Community of 'cow' is distinct form the forms of
•" all other Gommunities ; just in the same manner as the form
"of the »dividual cow is different form the form of other in" dividuals ; and all ühis could not be possible unless the two
" (the-class {<JOW ' and the individual cow) were identical. Nor
'• is it possible for one and the same thing (the Community) to
" be spekea of as the form of another thing, and also as
" somethiug only related to it; as anything that has no form
'* can have ne relationship. Hence it must be concluded that
" the real truth is that the generality and the individual are
" both identical.
" It is this reasoning that serves also to prove the theory of
'difference-identity ' (i e. the theory that the two are different
" as w«ll as identical). For instance, just as we have the
" cognition of the * piebald cow ', so also we have that of the
"black cow.' Nor do we have any such notion to the
"contrary, as that,' it is the piebald one only that is a cow,
" and not the black one'; in fact with regard to all cows
" we have the same notion that ' this is a cow/ ' that is a cow/
"and so forth. And thus the Community r cow'inthe form
"of the piebald coto being found in this cognition to be
u
identical with the black cow,—that Community comes to be
.'* diöerent from the individual piebald cow ; specially as the
'* only point in which the Community differs from one individual
0
object is that it is identical with other individual objects also
" (which the individual object is not); and the distinguishing
K

PRAgASTAPÄÜA BHÄSHYÄ— GH AP. VIX.
" feature of the Coromunityateo consists only in. it&beiogjdenticaL
"with both (all) individual objects..
" Objection : ' To say thafc one and the same thing ig both
" different and non-different is a contradiction in terms,'
" Reply : It is not right for you, versed as you are in the
"art of reasoning, to say this. That alone can- be regarded
" as contradictory and absurd which is uot found to be in
" keeping with, the real state of things; and in regard to that
"which is always in- keeping with the nature of things- as
" cognised by the valid means of knowledge,, the mention of
" absurdity itself would be an absurdity.
Page 316] " Objection: * We have nowhere else found
" two things to be both different and non-different.*
" Reply : Is it' necessary for sensuous perception to follow
in the wake of another perception, as it is in the case of
" inferential cognition i Well, if it were so, then it would
" be necessary to postulate an unending series of perception
" after perception. If then, sensuous perception were to
" operate by its own inherent capability, then the nature of a
" thing must be accepted exactly as it happens to be perceived ;.
" and this cannot be denied on the mere ground of its nob
" being seen elsewhere ; as if this were to be negatived, then
" all perceptions would become open to negation
" Thus we conclude that Community is not only eter" nal, but both eternal and transient ; because it is pro" ducible and destructible by the production and destruction of
"individuafe, and it continues in another individ.ual (even on
"the destruction of one individual).!1
To the above arguments, we make the following reply :—
(1) Is the perception cognisant of the Community and
the individual, exactly in the same form I (2) or is it
cognisant of a non-differenee between them ? (3) Or, does it
cognise them in different, forms ? In the case of the first;
alternative, there would be only one bhing (and nob two things in
11

660

COMMUNITY.

tbe shape of the Community and the Individual); and it would
not be that there are two things with one and the same form ;
as the non-difference of any two. things only consists in their
being cognised in one and the same form. In the case of the
second alternative, there is a self-contradiction ; as the cognition of difference is nothing more than the cognition of
different forma; and when such a cognition is possible, there can
be no cognition of non-difference ; and as such, how could you
ever establish the non-difference of two different things ? If it ia
asked—" how then have we the idea of non-difference " ?—we
reply—we can have no such idea in any way. Thus then, if we
are cognisant oi only one form, then there is a single thing, and
not two things; and if both forms are cognised, then there ia:
no possiblity of the cognition of non-difference. As for the
universally accepted .cognition of the ' cow' in regard to all
cows, this must be attributed to the inherence (of all individuals
in the «Arne Community). In the case of conjunction there would.
be a distinct cognition of soraesort of actual contact; while the
character of inherence is such that in its case the two members .«
related are perceived together in a single lump, just as we find |
In the case of the fire and the red hot ball of iron. The Com-|
munifcy itself canaot be regarded as the form of the I
individuality; the fact is thai» though the 4two are really
distinct, yet the individual is never perceived apart from the I
Community to which it belongs,—just as the plum in a ditch' •
is nob visible apart from the ditch ; though the two are distinctly perceptible as different from each other; for instance, •<
from a distance, even if we do not cognise the Community 'cow'
we are cognisant of the individual cow; and even though any
particular cow is not seen> we perceive the Community
'cow- in another cow that we see.
For these reasons we conclude that Community is
something wholly different from the individual Such is the
process of reasoning adopted by the Logicians,

BHÄSHYA-CHAP. YIL
These again are different from one another <kc, <fcc. The
Communities of 'Substance' 'Quality* and 'Action' reside only in
substances, qualities and actions resptscti vely ; and with regard
to each of tbese we have a distinct cogoition ; for these
reasons they must be regarded as distinct from each other.
It ha» been stated before that Community is of the nature of
non-difference ; and this same fact the author proceeds to prove
by means of reasonings:—Each of them is regarded as one
dec, de. The word ' lakshana ' ' character' means that whereby a thing is distinguisted ; hence, in the present instance/the
notion of inclusion (a comprehensive notion of one Community
as extending over many individuals); this comprehensive notion
is found to be exactly the same in each individual oi a Commu»
nity ; nor are there any * marks ' or reasons for regarding them
as different in different individuals ; and from these two facts
it is clear that the Community is one and the same in all
individuals that are included in it.
It has also been stated before that the Community inheres
in all its objectives only, and not in any other thing; and the
auther now proceeds to bring forward reasons in support of
this:—Though Communities dö. As a matter of fact it is
found that a Community is related to many individuals appearing at all sorts of places ; and hence its extension is b*y no
means limited; yet in as much its manifesting cause, in the
shape of the peculiar shape of the objects included under it, is
one of particular kind, the Community itself becomes restricted •
in its scope; and then again, by reason of the limited character
of the causes productive of the objects, the Community inheres
only in its objectives, and in all of these. That is to say, the
Community.of the 'cow ' is manifested or rendered perceptible
by a body which consists of the dewlap and such other limbs ;
and the Community of the ' horse ' is manifested by the body
consisting of the mein and so forth; the Community of the
'jar' is manifested by a body having a peculiarly shaped neck ;
ail this we* infer from the fact of our idea of such and such

662

COMMUNITY.

things being restricted fco such and such forma. These various
kinds of bodies too are not found fco be common to more than
one class of objects ; in fact each of them is restricted to one
set of objects oaly ; thus then, though every Community is
capable of being connected with all such bodies as are its.*
objectives, whenever and wherever such bodies might be
produced,—yet it can inhere only in such an object as it
happens to be endowed with the body manifesting that
Community. In the same manner the scope of the Community
would, be limited by reason of the particular nature of the causes
tending to produce thab particular shaped body ; for instance,
such is the nature of the yarns, that in a thing produced out
of these only the Community of ' cloth * can inhere ; and 3uch
is the character of the lump of clay that the generality of the
* Jar' can inhere only in objects produced out of them.
Some people hold the following view :—<• The Community
being absolutely inactive, could never move from one place to
another, and thereby become connected with different objects ;
hence in the case of an object that did not exist before, when
it is brought into existence, the Community could not come to
inhere in it; and yet as a matter of fact we find that whenever and wherever the individual object is produced the
Commuuifcy is always present in it; and this leads us to conclude
that all Communities exist everywhere (are omnipresent or allpervading)."
With a view to refute this view, the Author adds,—As
Communities do not exist either in conjunation <#$., &o. The
'interval' here spoken of may be either (1) Äkäga» or (2) the
substance Space, or (3; Air not in motion, or (4) absence of
corporeal substance; and in any of these the Communities do not
exist either by conjunction or by inherence ; nor is there any
avidence for believing thatv they exist without any sort of
relationship ; consequently its is said that they do not exist
in the' intervals'; and yet they become connected with the

PRAgASTAPÄDA. BHÄSHYA—CHAP. VII.

663

objects that happen to be brought ip,to existence at these
intervals,—this being due to the peculiar force of the causes.
Conjunction comes about only when one object comes, from
another place, and into contact with the other thing; or a
thing remaining in its place could bave conjunction with
another thing that would move up to it. Inherence however
is of a different character; and hence wherever the requisite
causes are set going towards the producing of the object, there
in that object we have the inherence of the Community which
does not come from an)'where else, and yet which had no existence
at that point of space before the appearance of the object; and
this peculiarity we cannot take objection to; as we cannot
object to the nature of things as they exist.

The Bauddhas hold that there is no sucb thing as
• Community ';as we are never actually coguisant of anything as
inhereing in a number of individuals, in the manner of the
thread passing through all the beads strung on it'
But this is not right; because as a matter of fact we are
cognisant of something that exist in all individual cows, and
serves to distinguish them from all other animals, such as the
horse and the like. If there were no such common character
possessed by all the various kinds of cows, then one individual
cow would be cognised to be as different from another individual
cow, as it would be from-an individual horse; or conversely»
the cow and the horse would be regarded to be as like each
other, as two individual cows ; as there would be no difference
in the two cases. As a matter of fact however, we find that
all individual cows are perceived to be alike ; and this distinctly points to a certain factor which is present in all cows,
and is not present in horses and other animals; specially as
this factor is found to serve one and the same useful purpose
(that of differentiating the cow from other animals), aod as
it has one and the same cause (in nil cases).

664

COMMUNITY.

It might be argued that the unity is that of the individual
cows. But this is not possible ; as if there were no Community^
there could be no unity either among the Individuals, or of
the causes of these Individuals ; as all these are distinct from
one another. Then again, if the unity were to be due to the
mere unity of the cause, then there would be no sort of unity
in the case of those individuals that have diverse causes, As
a mattei of fact however, we And that there are different causes
for things of the same kind ; for instance, ore is produced from
such diverse sources as the rubbing together of two pieces o (
wood, electricity, the rays of the sun falling OD the Süryakänta
gem and so forth. So aUo if unity of many things were due to
the fact of their producing the same effect, then such unity would
have to be admitted in the case of totally different objects ;
for instance milk is found to be produced from the cow, as
from tire buffalo ; and thus the cow "swould be the same as the
buffalo; and the non-milch cow would not be ft cow at all 1
Then again, if there were no Community, what would
be the object of denotation by a word ? The * specefic individuality ' of any thing could not, be such an object; as having
a momentary existence and being excluded form all things, it
could never form the object of any verbal convention (on which
the denotations/ of words chiefly depend). Nor could the
vikalpa, or * determinate concrete qualification of a thing', be
the object of denotation ; as this also has only a momentary
existence, and is not common to any number of things. It
might be*argued that " the denotation of the word would be
of the form of the t.' concrete qualificatian." Bat Jo that case,
is the ' form of the concrete qualification ' something different
from that * qualification ', or is it non-different from it ? If it
is different, then is it common to all such qualifications ? or is
different with each qualification ? If it is common to all, then
it does not differ from what we call 'Community ' ; and the
only slight difference that there is between you and ourselves
is that you regard this ' Community' to belong to the cognition,

PRAgASTArADA BHÄSHYA-CHAP VII»

665

while we attribute it to the object, OQ account of Its being
cognise'd as something outside of ourselves. If then, this form
be regarded as distinct from the * qualification', and changing with
each cognition,—or ev«n if it were non-different from the
cognition,—in either case, it Would not be capable of any verbal
relationship ; a« like cognhion it would never form the object of
any verbal convention.
It might be urged that, " what the 'concrete qualification*
does is to indirectly impose its own external form on the cognition, and thus make it also concrete ; as it is only thus that the
cognition could come into existence, and this externality
of form would form the basis of the verbal relationship."
But in that case, the form of the concrete qualification
externally imposed, having its character dependent upon a
single thing (viz the qualification itself), would be destroyed as
soon a3 it would be produced on the production of the * concrete qualification '; and thus being cognised as undergoing destruction, it would be different with each 'concrete qualification"; and we have already shown that there can be
no verbal convention with regard to any such thing as would
diöer with each individual.
Objection: "The * concrete qualification' of the cow
." imposes its appearance externally ; aad the appearance imposed
" by another 'coucrete qualification would be similar to that
u
imposed by the former. The concrete qualifications too are com'* prehensive of their own forms only ; and as such they could
u
never lead to the apprehension of the difference among the forms
11
imposed by themselves ; as the apprehension of difference
" depends upon the apprehension of both the members (between
" whom the difference exists). Hence as this difference is not
" apprehended, we come to look upon th8 forms imposed by the
u
concrete qualifications to be ail one only; and thus speak of
" there being a single objective for all these qualifications. Ic is
" this objective that» constitutes the ' Säoiäoya' or' community';
"

44

COMMUNITY.
"and this community is negative ia its character, being
"devoid of any absolute difference from the externally imposed
"forms of the * concrete qualifications'; and combining with
" the four other factors-—of (1) the * specific individuality; (2) the
" cognition, (3) the form of the cognition, and (4) the imposed
" form,—cornea feo be spoken of as ' ardhapancamdkära (with a
" four-and-a half-fold form) ;and having externality imposed upon
•" it, it becomes expressible by words, and thereby comes to be the
41
objective of the verbal relation. And it is the cognition of this
" that consititutes the cognition of the ' specific individuality';
'and the form in which the community is imposed is that
*' of ttoat individuality. This 'community' again has the character
" of the preclusion of all other things ; it has both positive and
" negative forms, as is proved by such assertions as ' the cow is',
"'the cow is not \ and so wich all other things ; if the communi'• ty expressed by the word - cow' were only in the positive form,
" then we could not have the assertion ' the cow is ' ; as such
" an assertion would be tautological (the idea of i is * being con" tained in the word ' cow' itself) / nor could we have the
" assertion ' the cow is not'; as this would be a contradiction in
"terms (no negation being compatible with positive charac" ter); similarly, if it had a purely negative form, tbe asser** tion 'the cow is not' would be tautological, and that * the
" GOW is' would be a contradiction in terms; as has
" been declared in the following words:—'We cannot say that
" the jar exists, as the jar is a real entity; nor can we say the
"jar does not exist, as there is contradiction between existence
" and non-exsistence\ It; is for this reason that even distinct
" individuals appear as one.
"This 'community* is the objective of all 'concrete quali" fications ' ; and the singleness of this leads to the singleness of
" these qualifications; and the singleness of these latter leads
"to the singleness also of their origin in the shape of the
" abstract unqualified cognitions that we have with regard to
" each individual object; and this leads to the singleness of tbe

PRA^ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP VII.

667

"originof these abstract notions,—namely, the objects them" selves. This has been thus declared :—'The cognition being
"the cause, a single idea cannot be diverse ; and as the cause
w
of a single cognition the individualities must be one".
To the above we make the following reply: The above
reasoning is not sound ; as it would seem that the Bauddhas
give the name * community * to the unity that is imposed by
reason uf the non-apprehension of the difference among the
forms of the ' concrete qualifications/—this non-apprehension
being inferred from the facti of no other alternative being found
to be possible. And on this point we havr the following
observations to make :—Does the * imposition of non-difference'
consist in the non-apprehension of difference among the forms ?
or does it consist in the apprehension of /non-difference ? The
former could not be the case ; ait in that case the imposition
of difference too would be as likely ; that is to say, just as the
differences among the forms of the concrete qualifications are
not apprehended, so also is non-difference not apprehended ;
and hence just as nondifference is imposed by reason of the
non-appehension of difference,—so, in the same manner, woul^
difference be imposed by the non-apprehension of non-difference ;
and thence there could be no usage based upon non-difference.
Nor is the second alternative quite reasonable—viz : that the
imposition of non-difference coosists in the apprehension of
ao a-difference. Because it is only when the ^existence of the
soul is admitted that a single perceiver can apprehend both
difference and non-difference; when however, the existence of
the soul is denied (as it is by the Bauddha), there can be no
one observer of many things; speceally as'.the ' concrete qualifications ' are each restricted to their own individual forms.
Sven though there be asingle observer of many things,—yet unless,
there be any ground for singleness, there can be no apprehension of non-difference among different things. In fact, even
*The reading ' abkävddehö' does not afford any meaning , hence the trenala«
tioa »dopt« thereading•'ätmavädt.'

660

COMMUNITY.

if there were such an apprehension, it would be possible also
in the case of such different forms as those of the cow, the
horse and the buffalo; as there would be no difference in the
character of the differences in the two cases.
Page 3 2 0 ] Objection: " I n the case of the forms of the
cows, we have such a ground for singleness in the form of the
preclusion of non-cows"
Reply : What are the * non-cows' the preclusion whereof
imposes singleness on the form of cows 1 It might be urged
that those animals that are not cows are the ' non-cows.1 But
then, the question would arise—what are the cows that are not
'non-cows' ? And thus it would be necessary to determine the
forms of the aw, the preclusion whereof would determine
the form of the non-cow ; and conversely it would be necessary
to determine the form of the non-cow, the preclusion whereof
would determine the form of the eoiu; and thus the ignorance
of one would imply the ignorance of both. As has been thus
declared by the great teacher (Kumärila): * It would only be
the well-known cow that could be precluded; and as this
preclusion would be in the form of the negativing of the cow,
it becomes necessary to say what this cow is that is negatived ;
until the cow is known, there can be no non-cow ; and when
there is no non-eowfyjhence could there be the cow 1 (Qlokavartika—Chapter on ' Apoha').
Ib might be urged that what constitutes the denotation of
the word is the Apoha or negation of the contrary. To this we
make the following reply : what is this * apoha' ? Is the ' apoha/
* the negation of the non-cow' a positive entity, or a negative one ?
If the former, then, is this positive entity of the same character
as the individual cow,'* or is it in the form of the individual
n©n-cow ? If the former, then it becomes something specific
(as pertaining to a definite individual) and not genetic (pertain*

PRA<?ASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP VII.

669

ing to ail individuals; and we have already show a that no
verbal process caolapply to any euch specific entity. If however, it be held to be of the nature'of the individual non-cow,
then too the same objections would apply ; and over and
above these there would be the further objection tha^t the cow
in that case would cease to form the denotation of the ird' cow\
If then the ' Apoha' be regarded as a positive entity apart from
the particular individuals,*and pertaintng to all of these,—then
the difference in our views would be only verbal (as in this case
what you call * apoka' we call * Sämänya1).
Further, if Apoha be regarded as a negative entity, consisting
as it does, of negation Jor preclusion,—thea (being a negative
entity) it could never4be apprehended by a direct positive sensuous cognition ; as it is only that which produces a cognition
that can have the apprehensible or coginsable character; and a
negative entity is, by its?very nature, wholly devoid of the productiveness of any effect. And when a thing is not cognised by
Sense-perception, there can be no cognition of a verbal convention with regard to it; and thus no verbal process could apply
to a negative entity. When a negative entity is cognised by
means of a word, the person hearing the word could not, by
its means, be moved to any activity towards a* positive object;
for the simple reason that the negative is wholly different from
the positive entity, and the two are] devoid of all reationsbip
between themselves.
Objection : " The verbal process applying to the ' specific
individuality * must be regarded as due to non-discrimination
or ignorance; snice the individuality is cognised in the negative
form; that is to say, the cognition of the cogniser is mistaken,
being due to their unifying the perceptible and the imaginary,
and then attributing a character to a thing to which it does nob
belong.»"
*Thia sentence i« rather obscure *t aud appears to be a quotation from an old
Bauddha work.

670

COMMUNITY.

Riply: This is nob right ; that w.tiich is not cognised cannot have imposed on it any thing as identical with
itself, in the form of a negative entity. As a matter of fact,
the parson hearing the word uttered has at that time no
cognition of the object signified ; as the word (according to
you) pertains' to something wholly different; and there is no
other means available for cognising it ; and yet we find the
word giving rise to an activity on the part of the hearer, towards a positive object. And hence we cannot regard a
negation to be the denotation of a word.
Nor have we any other ground for singleness (of the forms
of individual cows). If all positive entities were to be mere
negations of one another, and appearing as a new object at
every moment, then no such entity could be cognised by means of
any word; and that which is not directly cognised cannot form
the object öf avoidance or acceptance, asita capablities would be
absolutely unknown. And yet as a matter of fact, we do find
usage based upon words ; and so have we also the activity of all
living beings jn the world tending towards the obtaining of ehe
desirable and the avoiding of the undesirable, and procediog
from direct sensuous perception. And it is this usage that
establishes the existence of a community common among many
individuals; and it is to these communities that we find
the denotations of words to pertain ; and when a man knows of
the capabilities of a certain class, and he comes to know thai;
such and such a thing belongs to that class, he acts towards
the obtaining of that object, even though he may never have
perceived the particular object before.
Thus then the comprehensive cognition pertaining to distinct
individuals serves as the basis for Community; and if this were
a mere negation, then the whole activity of the world would be
impossible.

PARgASTAPÄDA SHÄSHYA-CHAP. VIII.
CHAPTER VIII.
On Vicesha,
Text (156): Individualities are the ultimate (*. g., final)
specificatives or d>jferentiatives of their substrates. They reside in suck beginning less and
indestructible eternal substances, as the Atoms,
Akdcay Time, Space, Soul and Mind,—inhering
in their entirety in each of these, and serving
as the basis of absolute differentiation or
specification. Just as we have with regard
to the Bull as distinguished from the Horse,
certain distirct cognitions—such f. i. as,(l)
that it is a ' bull,' which is a cognition based
upon its having the shape of other bulls, (£)that it
is ' white? which is based upon a quality, (S) that
it is * runing swiftly*, which is based upon action
(4) that it has a 'fat hump,* which is based
upon ' constituent parts,' and (5) that it carries
a ' large bell \ which is based upon conjunction ;
so have the Yogis, who are possessed of powers
that we do not possess, distinct cognitions based
upon similar shapes, similar qualities and
similar actions—with regard to the eternal
atoms, the liberated souls and minds; and as
in this Gase no other cause is possible, those causes
by reason whereof they have such distinct cogni- k
tions,—as that 'this is a peculiar substance'
' that a peculiar soul' and so forth,—and which
also lead to the recognition of one atom as being
the same that was perceived at a different time
and place,—are what we call the 'ultimate
Individualities.1
Page 322 ] Objection; " What would be the harm if
even in the absence of such f Individualities,'
Yogis could have, by the help of merits born of

672

INDIVIDUALITY.
Ycgic practices, the said distinct cognitions and
recognitions ?"
Reply ; This could never be; just as the merits born of
Yoga could never bring about the cognition of
whiteness where there is no whiteness, or the
recognition of that which has never been perceived;
in fact if there were any such, they could only be
false; exactly in the same manner, without the
* ultimate individualities1
in question, the
Yogis could not, by the helps of the merits of
Yoga alone, have the distinct cognitions or recognitions referred to above.
Objection : " Why cannot you assume a self-differentiation in the atoms themselves, as you do in the
' Individualities * V*
Keply: The atoms themselves could not be the cause of
these distinct cognitions; because of all atoms
having the same nature ; that is to say, asamatter
of fact we find that the cognitions that a certain,
thing brings about are with regard to things
other than itself; e.g., the lamp brings about
the cognition of the jar ; and certainly one lamp
is never rendered cognisable by another lainp,
And just as the flesh of the cow and the horse are
unclean by themselves, and other things become
unclean by coming in contact with them,—so in
the case in question, the 'ultimate Individualities,' though of the same nature, are differentiated by themselves, and the atom &a, become
differentiated by reason of their contact with these
' individualities' (I-ii-6).
Commentary.
Reverence, to the Wearer of Five Faces who is free from

BHÄSHYJL— CHAP. VIII.

$73

five-foidnes8, and who is* the ordainer of the four cycle« of
time, the four sciences.and the four castes!
Page 323.] The eternal substances are called * anta '
'^end * or * ultimate/ because they continue to exist at the end
of (after) all productions and destructions; and the' specific
individualities' inhere in these eternal substances and they
a re called ' vigesha' or' specific,1 because they serve to
specify or differentiate tbeir^substrates from all other things.
This the author proceeds to explain—They reside in such
beginningless and indestructible &c.t &c. This expression,
serves to explain what is meant by the word' antya,' ' ultimate'
The expression, * serving as the bases <&c* explains what is
meant by the individualities being differentiatives of their
substrates.1 Inhering in their entirety &c.—that is, in each
substance there is only one distinct * Individuality; in as
much as the differentiation of one substance is accomplished
by a single ' individuality,' there would be no need for assuming
any more of such ' Individualities/ How this is the distinguishing feature of c Individualities ' we have explained before.
As the putting forward of the definition of these individualties would be right only after their existence has keen proved,
the author proceeds to prove their existence
Just as we have distinct cognitions with
regard to individual cows &c, so would those people who are
capable of perceiving the atom &c, be sure to have distinct
cognitions with regard to these ; as only thus could the
existence ef individual atoms be possible. The mere difference
among the individuals could not be the cause of these distinct)
cogoitions ; as though we may see an individual object, we may
not have a definite cognition with regard to it; as we find in
the case of the post which, when seen, is not definitely recognised as a post. The distinct cognitions in question could
not be possible without some cause, and we find no other ground

INDIVIDUALITY.
or cause available, in as much as the shapes, qualities and action
are the same in all; hence that which serves as the cause or ground
of the distinct cognitions of the atom &c, is what we call * specific
individuality.' Then again, atoms are often recognised to be
the same even though seen at different times and places ;— aod
that they are thus recognised is proved by the fact of their
belonging to certain communities, and possessing certaiu
' individualities ',—just like such ordinary objects as the jar
and the like. No recognition of a previously perceived substance
would be possible unless it possessed some ' specific individuality '; hence we conclude that the cause or ground for the
distinct cognitions in question, lies in the form of the * specific
individuality'.
An objection is raised : " The Yogis have the perception of
super-sensuous things, by reason of certain merits acquired by
yoga; and by the Same powers they could have the distinct
cognitions aud recognitions of atoms &c, even without the
* individualities'/'
Reply :—This cannot be;
.The perception of supersensuous things also by
force of yogic powers is not without some cause.
Page 324.] Objection: " Why cannot you assume <be.,
&c. The Individualities could not be possessed of further
individualities; as that would land us in aregressus ad infinitum ; and hence, just as distinct cognitious, by Yogis, of the
individualities are possible even without tiicir possessing other
individualities,—so could the Yogis have in the case of atoms
also by themselves; what then is the use of assuming any
individualities at all ?"
Reply: Not so;
because one thing tends to
bring about the cognition of somethiug different from itself; ö. g.
the jar, &c, which are not of the nature of Light, are illumined
and rendered perceptible by the lamp, which is of the nature of
LightJ ; and one lamp is not illumined by another; every lamp

PRACASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IX.
being self-luminous. Just as the flesh of the e<no <&c, <£c., &c.
The touch of these unclean things brings impurity to the mac
touching them. The distinct cognitions of the atoms, which are
distinct and possessed of certain common properties, are possible
only by reason of certain ' individualities', and not by themselves.
In each of the eternal substances, possessing certain properties in common, there inhere certain individualities which serve
to differentiate them.
CHAPTER IX.
Ou Samaväya—Inherence.
Text f!57j: Inherence is the relationship between
things that are inseparably connected, and which
stand to each other in the relation of the container
and the contained,—the relationships namely,
that serves as the ground of the notion that * such
and suck a thing subsists in this.7 That is to say,
the relationship named ' Samaväya' or 'inherence'
is that from which proceeds the notion that ' this
subsists in this,1—tuith reg trd tö substances,
qualities, actions,communities andindividualities,
that appear in the form of causes and effects, as
well as those that do not appear as causes and *ff(c!8,
which are inseparably connected; and also
that relationship from which proceeds the interdependence of things of limited extension upon
something else, from which they are known to be
different. As for instance, the notion that 'there
is curd in this pit* is found to be present only
when there is a distinct relationship between the
two things ; so also the notions—' the cloth is in
thes* threads' * the mat is in these reeds' ' thzs%
quality and that action am in this substance'
* Being is in these substances, qualities and

$76

INHERENCE.

actions', ' there is the general character of substance in this substance', i the general character of
quality in this quality', ' the general character
of action in this action', l the ultimate individualities in this eternal substance1; and from all
such notions we infer the existence of the relationship in question, ( VIl-ii-29, 27, 28, ; F-ii-23;
Commentary.
Reverence to £iva, accompained by Umä, the destroyer of
internal darkness, the cause of the destruction aud origination of
the universe,—He who has pure Consciousness for his body !
The author proceeds to describe 'Samavaya' or 'inherence1.
Inherence is the relationship <fcc., <&?. This we have already
explained when mentioning the categories by name. The
author proceeds to show what the ' inseparable substances' are,
the relationship whereof is called inherence':—With regard
to substances Sec, Sec. i That appear in the form of causes
and effects and those that do not appear in these forms'—this
is added with a view to restrict the scope of the relationship;
that is to say, the relation between the whole and its parts,
between transient substances and their qualities, between eternal
substances and the transient qualities belonging to them,
between actions and the substances to which they [belong—all
these appearing in the form of causes and effects,—is ' samavdya
or ' inherence'; and it is also that relationship which subsists
between eternal substances and their qualities, between
communities and the individuals included therein, between
ultimate individualities and the substances in which they reside,
—all these not appearing in the form of causes and effects,
bufc being inseparably connected.
Similarly the expression—'in the relationship of the
container and the contained*—is added by way of a restriction.
Inherence is that which gives rise to the notion that ' this
subsists in that'.

PIUgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CHAP. IX.

677

Inherence also consists in the interdependence, or non-se«
paratenesa of such thiagg of limited extension as are distinctly
koowu to be different) from each other. This we infer from the
fact of mutual intermixture of two distinct things being
due to a certain definite relationship (and this relationship can
be none other than that of inherence).
This same fact the author proceeds to explain further :—Ä8
for instance &G., &C. All the notions cited point to some sort
of & distinct relationship between the two objects in each case.
The argument is put forward infchefollowing form :—* All these
notions are based upon a particular kind of relationship,—
because they are definitely ascertained notions,—like the
notion * there is curd in this pit.'
Page 326]. Text (158); Inherence is not mere conjunction ; (1) because the members of this relationship
are inseparably connected; (2) because this
relationship is not caused by the action of
any of the members related; (S) because it is not
found to end with the disjunction of the members ;
and (4) because it is found subsisting only
between the container and the contained.
Commentary.
The author proceeds to show that Inherence is not the
same as Conjunction. The relationship between the yarns and the
doth is not one of Conjunction. In proof of this, the following
four reasons are given :—
(1) Conjunction occurs between objects that, prior to the
conjunction, have a separate existence ; whereas Inherence
subsists between objects that have no separate existence.
(2) Conjunction is brought about by the action of one or both
of the members related, whereas in the case of Inherence we
do not find any such cause; And the only cause for this relationship lies in the productive potency of the cause bringing the

67S

INHERENCE.

substances into existence. (3) Conjunction ceases as soon as there
is a disjunction of the members related ; whereas Inherence is
indestructible. (4) Conjunction occurs between two substances
that have independent existence ; for instance, the various fingers
of the hand come into mutual contact when the hand is held
up; whereas Ioherence snbsists only in such substances as
stand to each other in the relation of the container and the
contained.
»
For these reasons, Inherence cannot be regarded as the
same as Conjunction ; it is a distinct relationship.
Text (159); Inherence is a cxtegory distinct from
Substance and the rest; as like ' being \ it has a
character different from these. That is to say,
as in the case of ' being * we find that bringing
about notions of itself in regard to the substrates of the classes of ' substance ' and the rest,
it differs from its substrates, as also from other
classes,— so also Inherence, being the cause of
the notion that ' this subsists in that,' with regard
to the other five categories, must be regarded as
something diflerentfrom these. Nor is there
a multiplicity of Inherences, as tfare is of Conjunctions ; because like ' being \ Inherence has the
same distinguishing feature, and also because
there are no reasons for making distinctions in
regard to it; for these reasons Inherence, like
• being \ must be regarded as ane only.
Commentary.
Having thus proved the existence of Inherence, the author
proceeds to show that it is distinct from the other categories:—By 'bhava* the community of 'Being' is meant;
the mention of * substance &c.' includes the classes of ' Quality'
&c. In the case of 'Being' we find that it brings about

PüAgASTAPÄBA BHÄSKYA-CHAP. IX.
notions akin to itself,—sacb for instance as * this is'—with regard
to its substrates, in the shape of substances, qualities and
actions; similarly the class of • substance,* brings about the
idea of substance with regard to ' its substratesj Substances ;
the class of * Quality * gives rise to notions of quality in
regard to its substrates, Qualities; similarly the class of Action
brings about Dotions of itself with reference to its substrates,
Actions. And just as bringing about these notions, the classes of
' Being/ * substance ' &c, are regarded as different from one
another, and also from their respective substrates» —in the same
manner, in the case of Inherence also, we find that it gives rise
to the idea that ' this subsists ia that/ in regard to all the other
five categories; and as such it cannot but be regarded as
something different from these latter.
As regards the question as to whether Inherence is one or
many, the author says—It has no multiplicity, as Conjunction has; just as iu the case of * Being' we find that there is no
difference in the various notions of ' being/ so, in the same
mäuner, we do not find any difference in the various notions of
Inherence that we have; nor have we any proof for regarding
Inherence as many; and for these reasons we conclude that
Inherence is one only.
Text (160;:—Objection r * / / Inherence is one only,
then, in as much as there would be one and the same
relationship between substances and the class
* substance,' between qualities and the class* Quality* and between actions and the class ' Action,'—
we would have- an intermixture of Categories."
Beply : Not so ; because of the differences in th& container and the contained in each case. That is
to say, though Inherence is one only everywhere
and self-sujjieitnt, yet there is a restriction
due to» the difference of the container
and the contained. For instance, the community of 'substance9 reside» in substavces

INHERENCE.
only; the community of 'quality' in qualities
only ; and that of l Action * in actions only.
Question; " How do you know that this is so ? "
Answer: We learn this from the perception of their
concomitances and non-concomitances; that is to
say, from the invariable ejncomitance of the notion
of * thts subsists in that \ which is based upon
Inherence, we infer that Inherence is one only
everywhere; and from the non concomitance of
the notion of * substance ' <£&, in all cases we
infer that there is a restriction or limitation in.
regard to them,. For instance, as in the case of
the curd and the pit, though the conjunction is.
one only, yet there is a restriction (as to which is
the container and which the contained),—so, in
the same manner, in the case of the communities
(of ' substance ' <&c).f even though the Inherence is
one only, there is restriction as to the container
and the contained, based upon the differences in
the potencies of being the 'manifester* and the
'manifested.*
Commentary.
The sefese of the objection may be thus explained :—" If
Inherence were one only, then the relationship that the com*
munity of ' substance' would bear to the Earth and other sub«
seances would be the same aa that subsisting between the community of c Quality' and the particular qualities, and also that
subsisting between the community of * Action' and the particular
actions;and thus in as much as the connection of the community
of ' substance ' which makes the Earth a substance, is the
same the presence whereof we would find in qualities and
actions also,—these latter also would be substances; and in
the same manner, the connection of the community of' Quality *
making colour, &c, qualities would be the same as that present

PRAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA-CHAP. I&.
in substance« and actions ; and these latter would be qualities
and so also as regards the connection of the community of
* Action/ Thus there would be an intermixture or overlapping
of the categories."
[Page 328] Reply: There can be no overlapping among the
categories ; as the mere presence of Inherence does not make a
substance ; it is the inherence of the community of * suhstance ',
and that too in a substance only; and not in qualities or
actions; hence these latter could not be substances. So
also with the inherence of qualities and actions.
The .author proceeds to explain this statement:—Though
Inherence is self-sufficient and does not, like Conjunction, subsist
through any other relationship &cM &c, &c.
Another objection is raised : " How do you know that the
community of * substance ' resides in substances ouly, that of
* quality' in qualities only and that of * Action ' in actions only ?"
The answer to this is that, as a matter of fact we feel
that the idea of the community of ' substance ' is concomitant
with, or present in, substances only, and is non-concomitant
with, or absent from, qualities and actions; similarly the idea
of the community of ' quality ' is present in qualities, and absenb
from substances and actions; and so also the idea of the
community of ' action ' is present in actions, and absent from
substances and qualities; and from all these concomitances and
non-concomitances we infer that there is a restriction as to the
communities of * substance^ &c.
Question : " But whence could you have such a restriction
when, Inherence is. one and the same in the case of all ? That is
to say, the inherence of the community of ' substance ' in Earth
and other suhstauces is the same as that of the community of
* quality' in colour and other qualities, and that of the community
of * Actiou' in 'Throwing upward ' and other actions."
April—Jane, 1915, VoL X X X V I I .

INHERENCE.
Answer : In the case of Conjunction we find {that though
ifc is one only, yet we have a restriction; as in the case of the
pit and the curd, we find that it is the -pit that is the container
aud the card the contained, this restriction being due to the
peculiarity o£ the capabilities of the objects concerned ; and in
the same manner, though Inherence is one only, yet there is a
restriction as to which among substances, qualities aad
actions are the container and which the cootained,—-a distinction that is based upon their manifestiveness and maoifestibiiifcy.
That is to say, the community of 'substance' is manifestable
by substances only; aod hence ifc is in substances alone that
that community inheres. Similarly with qualities aod actioas.
Text (161):—Even though the members related are
transient, the Inherence is not transient, Like
Conjunction ; because like Being, it is not brought
about by any cause. That is to say, in the case
of Being we have found that it is eternal, be<avse
we cannot cognise any cause for it, by any of
the valid means of knowledge ; and the same may
be said to be the case with Inherence also; a a
by none of the valid means of knowledge can
we find any cause for it.
Objection:—"By what relation does Inherfnce 'subsist
in substance &G / This relation can not be
that of conjunction; as conjunction being
a quality can reside in substances only (and
Inherence is not a substance); nor can the
relation be that of inherence; as the latter is
one only; and there is no third relation by
which it can subsist."
Reply:—Not so; as it ia itself of the nature of
relation or subsistence. In the case cf * Being '
with regard to substances, qualities and actions,

PUAgASTAPÄDA BHÄSHYA—CffAP. IX,

683

vje have säen that it has n> connection with
any other 'bein/'; and in the same manner,
lnhera-nc',, being inseparable (f torn its sttbstrate)
and of the very nature of a subsisting relation,
could have no other reldion; and hence it is
regarded as sdf-sufficient For this reason it has
been regarded as imperceptible by the smse-organs;
specially as it is not found to have an existence
in tha. perceptible substances in the same inanntr
that 'being' c&e, have; and as it is not
perceptible by its>lf, we cmclude that it is
on'y inferable from the notion that * this is
in that"

All reverence to - that Kanada ivho, having pleased
Mahecvara by the superb character of his*
meditation ana austerities, propounded the philo~
8 iphy of the Vaiceihiki system !
Thus ends the Padartha-dharmasangraha of Pragastapada.
Commentary
A question having beeo4 raised as to whether Inherence is
eternal or transient, the author says—Evev though, the members
<£c, d'C In the case of conjunction we fin<i that the members
in contact being transient», the conjunction also is transient;
but not so in the case of Inherence ; as in the case of conjunction
it is only natural that the destuicüeo of the members dhould
bring about the destruction of the conjunction as the members
form the material cause of the conjunction ; the case
of Inherence however is diftierent; the members are
mere reUted members, and not its cause; as we have bhown
above <
; heuce luherence u not destroyed on the destruction

INHERENCE.
of the members ; as we recognise it as preseufc in other
substances; just as is the case with/being* (which also is
eternal).
Objection :—" Does Inherence correlate the members
through some relation, or without any relation 1 Nothing could
correlate thingsVithout being related itself ; if it were not so,
then we would have most absurd relationships. Then, as for
being related, id could not bear the relation of conjunction
&c...
and as we cannot find any relation by which Inherence
can subsisD in substances, we conclude that it does not
subsist in them at all."
Reply : It cannot be rightly held that because if? has no
relationship, therefore it does not exist. Because it is itself of
the nature of relation or subsistence. A<< for conjunction, it is
caused; aud hence though-ä relation, it subsits by another relation;
the very presence of a cause constituting the nature of an effect;
and as for Inherence, it does not stand in need of any other
relation ; it subsists by itself.
Page 330.—For this same reason it is imperceptible by
the sense-organs etc., etc. * Being ' etc., are found to subsist in
perceptible things ; and hence they are regarded as perceptible
by the sense, by reason of the organs coming in contact with
the things in which * Being ' etc., inhere. Inherence however
cannot subsit iu the same manner, and hence it is regarded as
imperceptible ; as the organs of sense are found to have the
power of perceiving only such things as are iu direct contact
with them; or those that inhere in such things.
Objection : " If there is a sensuous cognition of Inherence, then it is a mere absurdity to declare that it has no
relation ; and if there is no such cognition, then that must
be stated clearly".
In view of this objection, the author adds—It is not
perceptible by itsdf. That is.to say, we have not the same cog-

BHÄSHYA— CHAP. IS.

680

nitioa of Inherence that we have of conjunction ; as the
members related by inherence are found to eoüstiiate a single
mass.
Thus then, Inherence should be regarded as that whereby
is brought about the coherence of distinct substances, and which
serves to set aside independence.
This commentary, the Nydyakatdali. consisting of a
combination of excellent letters and surpassing all others,
is like the range of the peaks of the mount Meru (which
is composed of a mass of gold, and which lies to the north
of all things).
This Nydyakandali, while putting forward the good poiots
of its own unmolested system, refutes the view oi the opponents.
Located in the southern part of the RädhcL (a district in
Bengal-Behar) is the village of Bhüri^rski belonging to the
Brähmanas that performed many sacrifices, and inbabitted by
many wealthy men.
From out of this village w,as born, likeiiie moon from the
Oceau, the Brahmana who was a moon on the earth, by
reason of his being a source of happiness to the people,—he who
was respected of ail people, like Brhaspati himself.
From him was born Baiadeva, the great ocean of the gems
of good qualities, the sustaining tree of the creepers of learning,
of purest intentions, the great propeller of the river of manifold celebrity.
Abhuka, bom of a pure family, having many good qualities,
was the wife of hnn, who was famous and possessed of excellent
qualities.
From her wa« born y.idhara, the fulfiller of the wish of
all needy men—affording excellent protection (good shade),
making excellent presents (producing good fruits), having many
children (^braucnesj, the refuge of Brahmauas (birds).

686

INHERENCE.

This pernon gave birth to the beautiful Nyayakaodaii, which
is fit to be listened to by the most clever among the learned,
and serves to explain the six categories.
The Nyäyakandall was oomposed in the year 913 of the
£äka era.
Thus ends the Nyäyakaodall, treating of the categories,
composed by Bhatta Qridhara» at the request of £ri Pandudäsa.

PAGE. LINE,

FOR

32 noiion.
361
393
12 pleasant)
409
13 bought
435
1 Thes
445
12 another
*75 2 foot note ive
513
27 belongs
517
26 dalu
525
19 ro
539
25 explicity
33 a such
552
28 Soon
556
13 of
562
10 atfort
563
11 undesirabl
14 sou
565
20 composit
568
U Intriasice
19 P ^
570
11 wheredy
572
19 series
573
19 our
580
14 ISO
584
17 final
599
15 viiuous.
604
11 committee
605 2 foot uote aecesaar
606
19 revoling
»
25 regard
608
9 poseibility
613
7 form
616
11 Chapter XI
622
7 eatering
it
15 form
626
33 final
630
84 and other
631
28 regious
636
9 for
643
23 partiele3
645
7 restricted
64*
29 extenal

READ.

notion
(pleasant)
brought
These
author
give
belongs to
dual
or
explicitly
such a
So on
or
effort
undesirable
soul
composite
Intrinsic
ity
whereby
series
of our
rise
final
virtuous
committing
necessary
revolvin
argued
possibility
form of
Chapter VI Section (11)
entering
from
find
an other
regions
far
particles
restricted
external
ring

ERRATA.
PAGE LINE.

FOR

23 meteojpychosia
35 80
1 to
17 sue
4 we have
2 en t era I
19 differeutatiou
20
>«
81
l i miueriala
82
3 qua tities
86
6 much.
87
14 efficiency
105
10 belong
13 an is
103
31 aud
121
33 thesmoke '
127
3 bot bayu
129
U /
132
12 buality of one thng
133
18 couch
138
32
33
t»
140
17 inact
148
25 simle
153
1 exist enc
16L
33 of
205
8 symultaneity
207
29 posetiority
212
13 posterority
213
17 A Ho bjeccs
214
23 Iufuence
215
4 knoiv ledge
262
30 auther
264
17 another
277
1 pipe
2*3
25 &ati*purined
294
33 our
322
5 rue tilts
355
3 wnd
5 ahich
356
10 0
1
37
43
52
53
66
74

READ.

metempsychosis
to
of
such
we have
eternal
differentiation
minerals.
qualities
such
efficiency
belong to
is an
and
the smoke
about by
It
quality of one <
conch
«/
it
intact
simple
existence
or
simultaneity
Posteriority
posteriority
All objects
Infereuce
knowledge
an tli oi•paper
satisfied
out
results
and
which
of

